I want to start yeah quote from your
hyper viral talk on the Oxford debate
stage uh you're talking about what
culture and so in the quote you're going
to say this side so I just want people
to know this side means this side of the
debate effectively and we on this side
of the house are not on this side of the
house because we do not wish to improve
the world we sit on this side of the
house because we know that the way to
improve the world is to work is to
create it is to build and the problem
with woke culture is that it's trained
too many young minds like yours to
forget about that I want to know why is
it training people to forget about that
there has to be a reason and there has
to be a reason that that's catching on
well I can have two meanings content
because you can have the what full
meaning or why as in because of right
and I don't think there's much of a what
for I think it's much more of it because
I think uh victimhood sells well people
in our current Society believes that
being a victim gives you advantages
because it does
because it does if you say
you know I'm an immigrant which I am uh
therefore and you list a bunch of things
that are difficult for you it's
weaponized empathy we live in a society
where we believe that
being a victim has some kind of moral
value almost right and so I think we are
we're training kids by incentives we're
incentivizing victimhood and so people
are becoming
you know it's like these kids who who
you know who are like no point no no one
percent Native American and stuff like
why would you do that why are we now
seeing increasingly people identify into
groups that we're supposedly told that
they're being discriminated against
people claiming to be things that
they're not actually in order to find
themselves in a position where they can
say well I'm a victim too right so I
don't think there's any grand plan
behind it I just I believe human beings
respond to incentives and if you
incentivize victimhood then you're going
to get victims
okay I'm with you on that but it feels
like this kind of thing is going to
Arise at certain times in history so I
started saying
to basically anybody who would listen
this is probably 15 years ago maybe more
that some people need to be chased by a
lion and it was me sort of grappling
with this idea of people latching on to
ideas that felt like
there's nothing in your life crowding
out you seeking a fight and because the
fight for survival isn't your daily
reality and things aren't hard now all
of a sudden you find yourself drifting
towards
um things that don't yield the desired
outcome because you're not in a life or
death situation and so I'll back that
off and say because I'm in business and
the business itself is constantly in a
life or death situation you just become
so pragmatic and you have to look at
data and you have to look at what is
working what is not working and so
there's a quote from Thomas soul that I
I've just become obsessed with which is
the last 30 years have been marked by
exchanging what worked for what sounds
good yes and I'm just like that makes
sense but it like I I want
those things to be true those things
being like some of the ideas of
Communism and stuff they really sound
awesome
but in reality like the numbers just
don't bear it out and so that idea I'm I
wonder if
the ideas of what the what divides the
culture war of victim mentality I wonder
if those incentives became incentives
because we actually have it so good
there's no longer a fight that's banging
down your door and it almost becomes a a
belief system that only people in luxury
can have yes and so I think there are
two parts to it I think yes that and you
know as you were talking the line that
came to me is life is suffering is that
Buddhist is that what the Buddhist said
the Buddha certainly say that suffering
arises from desire I don't know if they
say flat out life is suffering but it's
certainly someone says yeah the ideas
out there the ideas out there that life
is suffering and so if you don't have
suffering then
you're going to create it for yourself
and you know I I don't have a great
grand theory of this but my own
experience of life is that the very best
things that I've experienced as a result
of overcoming adversity it's the most
fulfilling thing and not least because
when you overcome adversity it gives you
the most powerful feeling that you can
have that I've ever experienced which is
the the being in control of your life it
gives you the illusion and is just an
illusion of being in control of your
life and so I think when you don't have
that adversity you're likely to end up
in a position where
you look for it elsewhere you look for
things to overcome so yes prosperity and
comfort and safety and all these things
that we enjoy in the modern West I think
produce this but also you hit the nail
on the head when you were talking about
tomaselle who's just I mean he's a
brilliant he's legit he
the the point that you make about
substituting things that work for things
that sound good
is so apt to the current moment because
of the internet and because of social
media because a lot of the communication
about these issues is a product of a
medium which rewards ideas that sound
good and punishes ideas that sound bad
if I say to you you know what are what
are some of the the things that are that
sound good you know all things to all
people look after everybody blah blah
blah blah blah sounds good what if I say
to you your life is your responsibility
it's up to you to make what you want out
of your opportunities and the
difficulties that you experience no
one's coming to save you no one right we
both know this no one's coming to save
you but it doesn't sound good it sounds
terrible and so if you have a system
which amplifies ideas that sound good
but don't work that is how you end up in
the position that we're ending up in and
increasingly some of these ideas are
beginning to clash with reality you know
and that's really the big narrative
collapse that I see coming is at some
point these things will get so bad that
reality will come and slap Us in the
face very very hard
that's my big fear so when I look at
what's going on when when a society gets
to the point that we're at where we're
just hyper affluent like even uh you
know obviously there there is a point
where people don't have enough calories
and okay they have truly fallen off the
ladder but even for people that are in
poverty and I have seen poverty up close
uh we were talking before we started
rolling
um I have gotten to know a lot of people
that have grown up in the inner cities
and so I've been inside their homes and
I Big Brother for a kid uh in Compton
and South Central he moved around for
eight and a half years so I really
really got to see it up close they have
refrigerators they have air conditioning
they have homes but the neighborhoods
are deadly and there there is
fundamental things about it that are
completely broken
but there are so many luxuries that we
take for granted and so as I was
looking at that and I had a thousand
employees that grew up in the inner
cities and I was like wow this isn't a
money problem this is a ideas problem
they have a mindset that is moving them
backwards
but when I say that I know how much that
Riles people up but it goes back to what
you said about it doesn't sound good to
say that you're in control that nobody's
coming to save you but that's what works
and so if you take Kobe Bryant's advice
he has it's rapidly becoming my favorite
quote which is that booze don't block
dunks and the idea that you can get so
good at something that people can't stop
you from succeeding now that puts you in
a position to be aggressive in skill
acquisition if you get aggressive in
skill acquisition and you meet minimum
requirements there is a certain amount
of intelligence which is why I love that
there's a social safety net and I
believe in all that and I think it's
wonderful because there's some people
that just aren't going to be able to
compete in that sort of Realm but once
you Embrace okay wait a second nobody's
coming to save me but I can get so good
at something that matters it could be
being a school teacher it doesn't have
to be running a business or whatever but
I can get so good at that thing that I
will always be able to make ends meet
I'll always be able to have for my head
Comfort Etc but that when we're in this
state where we have that sort of default
level of comfort that you get into a
positive feedback loop where
your ideas because
your ability to eat is not hanging in
the balance that you end up in a
situation where
your ideas never get put to that life or
death test and so you can Embrace ideas
that aren't going to force you to move
yourself forward and when you're in that
situation
there's nothing to unwind it there's
nothing to point out this is a bad idea
and it's not going to lead anywhere
until it all collapses and the society
breaks and now people are are in the
kind of pain and suffering that you need
to be in to make radical change
and radialio really outlines as well
with the six stages that any Empire goes
through and their the six stage is total
collapse it's usually war and that's the
transition from five to six and he puts
us in halfway through phase five and for
anybody or stage five for anybody that
doesn't know Ray dalio built the largest
hedge fund in the world this is a guy
who's put his money where his mouth is
bet that his assessment of the global
macro economic situation is accurate and
one more than anyone else in history and
he's saying hey boys and girls you're at
stage five and a half
and when when you look at that do you
see a way out of this do you see a way
to get people to exchange what sounds
good for what works
I don't want to give you an answer that
sounds good but doesn't work
I don't know is the truth Tom
all I know is what my mission is
in this space that's all I all I know is
I've got to say what I'm saying I've got
to try and wake people up to make them
aware
is it futile I genuinely don't know
I I just know that those of us who are
aware of this issue have a duty to say
something and have a duty to try and
bring people to that understanding
because if we don't and I keep making
this point wherever I go we don't
operate in a vacuum
there are other people in other places
who would also like to be prosperous who
would also like to be comfortable who
would also like to be powerful and then
teaching their children that their
countries share
they're not teaching their children that
the history of their country is defined
by the worst elements of it they're
teaching their children to be strong
confident intelligent well educated to
the extent that they can with the
resources that they have
um whereas we are doing the opposite we
are using our tremendous resources to
teach young people to hate their own
country and I I'm not as smart as as the
guy that you're talking about in terms
of being able to plot out the course of
civilization I'm just saying look maybe
this isn't a good recipe for for the
success of our civilization and our
society and the reason I think that
matters
is that I have lived in places many
places that are not the Western world
they do not operate by the same rules
they do not value the things that we
value and
who's to say that you know some people
would argue that you know well you know
the Chinese have their own value system
and the Russians have their own and
they're all relative to each other and
blah blah blah blah blah who knows who's
right or wrong I just know that for me
and for people who who are like me and
who think like me
the preservation and survival and
flourishing of the West
is very very important because the sort
of things that we believe in the sort of
values that we have they don't survive
well in those other cultures they're not
celebrated or encouraged or what are
Western values
so I think there are several I mean one
of them and the crucial one is the
sanctity of the individual
this is the most important thing that
separates us from everybody else uh or
certainly from many other major
civilizations so if you look at for
example what's happening in Ukraine
right now Vladimir Putin has absolutely
no hesitation about sending hundreds of
thousands of men to die in Ukraine for a
small piece of land because the
individual is not that valuable indeed
in Russian mythology you know not
mythology as in you know Gods but you
know the myths that Society tells itself
about itself
the sacrifice of the ordinary citizen
for
for the Monarch for the leader is a
noble and Brilliant thing and the this
kind of you know we lost 20 20 million
people in World War II and yet people in
Russia prior to this war and now the
they would drive around Moscow with
bumper stickers that said we can do this
again
right because we defeated Nazism and the
fact that it cost us 20 million lives
due to incompetence and and all sorts of
other things that happened under Stalin
that made that war so bloody and brutal
that's fine it's not a problem we won
and we can do it again right uh the
Chinese again the way their attitude to
you know covet happens let's lock you in
your home it's fine you know I remember
there was a I don't know if you saw this
there was a clip of a drone flying
around outside of one of these apartment
blocks in Beijing somewhere which said
you must suppress your something like
unnatural desire for liberty or
something like that right wow I may be
misquoting but the sense of the sense
was the same so the the central thing of
Western Civilization is to me at least
that I see is the idea that you matter
you as an individual matter your rights
matter your you have a value in and of
yourself by being a human being in a way
that other civilizations don't because
they're much more collectivist than
nature and so sacrificing you know it's
like if you if you had to cut off a toe
to save your whole body
that's a good deal right and that's how
a lot of other cultures think about
individual human beings too we don't
we generally don't we don't think about
it in that way we value the individual
um and then on top of that with that
comes a whole slew of other things if
the individual is valuable and is sacred
in some way uh that means that that
individual has a right to express their
opinions they have a right to pursue
happiness this is written into the
American Constitution they they have a
bunch of things that they're entitled to
do to speak their mind to research the
things and signs that they want to do
and in my view you know one of the
reasons that we are successful in terms
of science and technology is we have the
culture that produces better Science and
Technology because of those freedoms
right and this is the point I've always
tried to make to people in the west is
like the fact that we sit in this lap of
luxury and technological sophistication
and advancement and comfort is a product
of our cultural values and our history
it's not all about colonialism it's also
about the fact that we had a certain way
of looking at the world that was closer
to create aging the reality that we have
then other ways of looking at the world
right and it's the preservation of that
way of looking at the world that I think
is really important and the part of the
problem with what's going on now and one
of the reasons that I oppose
you know whatever you want to call it
progressivism or wokeness or whatever is
precisely because it is antithetical to
those values
um you know the idea for example that
human beings should be treated on the
content of the character
is not an idea that really exists
anywhere in the in the world
fundamentally other than the West uh you
know the idea in Russia the idea that
like a gay man is equal to a straight
man it's absurd
would never occur to someone to think in
that way gay people are minority look we
don't always have to beat them up but
but they're not but they're not real men
right that's a large part of how many
people in that country would think
um
you know if you're a uighur in China
again you know no one cares about your
rights you go on a camp
and
what bothers me about what we're doing
in Western societies we're undoing this
very novel and quite radical idea by
human standards that it doesn't matter
what your skin color is it doesn't
matter what your sex is we are going to
try to treat each other on the basis of
the fact that we're both individuals and
connect with each other through our
minds and through our hearts without
looking at all the superficial meat suit
[__] that doesn't actually matter
right that to me is valuable and I'm not
prepared to be quiet when people
transfer out of the window
it's really interesting so the
fundamental Schism being uh the
collective versus the individual
certainly
um an argument that I find very
compelling the thing that I think that
addresses that
see it's it's very uh out of fashion is
that that idea plants
the overcoming of things like slavery
like bigotry like uh having a problem
like if you go back you don't have to go
back very far to see gay people being
just absolutely ostracized and yet now
being more and more welcomed because
it's like if if there is and I'm not
religious but I like the idea if there's
a spark of divinity inside every human
there's something special there's
something sacred
and
when you have that that idea becomes a
bit of a mind virus and so even though
it takes a distressing amount of time
for these ideas to work their way in you
can go from the people that write the
Constitution end up writing in this mind
virus of
um all men are created equal when
obviously at the time that they write it
they don't mean it literally but it
plants an idea in people's minds and
that idea ends up taking over and this
is where
and I don't know that I've thought
through all of this well enough to be
like plant a flag and say this is my my
take on it which is actually one of the
things I want to talk to you about is
how difficult these ideas are to work
through
um which is part of how I think we end
up here but so you have this mind virus
that they plant in themselves it takes
hold and over time it it keeps you know
when people say the long Arc of History
bends towards Justice
when you have ideas like that and
now it what what's weird though is this
becomes an oroborus for people that have
ever seen that image of the dragon
eating its own tail it's like the very
idea of the and I'm I'm not stretching
beyond what I've ever said out loud
before so if you can help me adjust
course here by all means uh you get by
giving that sort of spark of divinity
and having that idea in people's minds
you then get to the point of my live
truth the way that I feel matters I I am
the Divine and so what I perceive is
therefore real
and so it becomes this weird moment and
I have so much love and empathy for
people that end up here because I really
the thing I've struggled with in my life
is my intellect is just limited enough
that I really struggle with like super
nuanced things I feel like over time I
can get somewhere useful but I have a
lot of empathy for people that get lost
in some of the Nuance so as you view
yourself as having that spark of
divinity that what I feel is so true
that for others to not recognize that is
somewhat of a personal affront and if
you're thinking that in a society where
for the most part like your basic needs
are going to be met
you now get in a point where you haven't
had the reality smacking you in the face
that you were talking about that forces
you to confront I don't think this is
working and
that gets us what we have now which is
very well-intentioned people that are
lovely beautiful humans that have value
in the spark of divinity but their ideas
are no longer bending the long Arc of
History towards Justice
it's a very interesting thought and I
think one of the things that went unsaid
there but is fundamentally at the core
of it is
that Society only works and I say this
is an agnostic if there is a religious
religious superstructure imposed on top
of it which says yes you have the spark
of divinity inside of you but there's
something greater than all of us
that that we are all connected through
um and once you take that away and you
put the human being on a pedestal
then yes my lived experience becomes
reality and the denial of My reality
becomes violent or an attack on on my
very identity that's where we are where
we are
um
so you're saying that we need a
superstructure to so here's an
interesting idea tell me if this jives
with what you're saying the right level
of analysis is the individual that's
something Jordan Peterson said that
really struck me like as you start to
atomize things and think about where
should these decisions be made it will
ultimately come down to the individual I
think he's right about that certainly in
a western context where it's not a
collectivist vision but
once you get down to the atomized
individual to avoid sort of ideological
chaos you have to have some sort of
superstructure that you exist within
that superstructure could be
um the Constitution the the Democratic
experiment that is the United States
um it could be religion but it has to be
something and if we don't have a shared
vision of what that superstructure
ought to be and I use that word with
moral implications
then we run into the trouble that we're
seeing now and then you have a very
polarized society in which people feel
like they're not even living in the same
country now do you think each side of
that debate is they have their own
superstructure and that's what makes
them a coherent side
never really thought about that so you
and I are working through some stuff
here that I've never really thought
about out loud before so I may say
things that I later don't necessarily
agree with but if we're working through
it do they have their own superstructure
well
I mean the the conservative religious
right have a superstructure and to a
certain extent
would we say that the work left has a
superstructure above it I mean you know
I think these these sort of reachings
for institutionalized whatever and
systemic whatever it's a it's an attempt
to have a world view that is just as
faith-based as the belief in a in a
Divine being if you think about it
because it's something that exists in
the absence of evidence even if there is
some evidence for it uh the argument
that the you know the ibrahimics candy
types make is that it's a circular
circular reasoning you know the absence
of racism is is only a reflection of the
fact that someone is being racist but
doesn't realize it that's kind of how
that works right
um so I don't know the problem is that I
think you need you need a superstructure
that is
in the words of a good friend of mine
who's a Cambridge Professor James Orr
we've just released an interview with
him it's brilliant we need something
that's pre-political
and free political and that is
essentially something that we all take
for granted you know
um
we don't really seem to have that
anymore and
that's why I'm so concerned you know I'm
neither on the right on the left but
when I see elements of the left go down
the path of sort of saying
ah
you know our countries are terrible
it makes me wonder well if you I don't
know if they actually think that but
let's say let's assume that they do
if you thought that this house was
terrible or that your life was terrible
or that the values of your country were
terrible why would you defend them
why would you fight for them why would
you teach those values and those ways of
being to your children
right
so if you get to a point where people
are no longer willing to understand that
while yes our society is not perfect it
is the best Society available and it is
therefore worthy of protecting and
defending and
growing as a result well then you've
kind of got yourself to a position where
you know I don't see this extreme
progressivism is seeking to make America
or Britain or the West better I just see
it as attempting to pull things down
because they're not good enough
right
that is a problem
because you're destroying that
superstructure
uh well I think the superstructure's
already kind of been destroyed you're
destroying you're laying the foundations
of
um
a civilization that is incapable of
Defending itself
I don't mean physically necessarily I
think if the United States was to be
attacked there'll be enough people who'd
go and fight the defender yeah but
that's so that's a really interesting
moment and so uh
I was literally just taking notes on
this idea so I grew up in the 80s uh
Arnold Schwarzenegger movies were
everything America was great your
hometown of Russia was bad and it was
awesome
and it was awesome because I had Clarity
I knew that we were the best I knew that
you were the enemy and that really gave
me an anchor and we had the same in the
Soviet Union by the way you were the
enemy of course we were the the great
and we were and everybody was happy yeah
so they're they're as I think about what
the actual note that I took is too many
perspectives coming too fast and so to
your point about social media what ends
up happening is every time you try to
Anchor This Is My Idea somebody hits you
with no no that idea doesn't make sense
and you're like oh damn they kind of
have a point but now I feel unmoored
again and so then you're like I just
need a team just tell me what team I'm
on and this is how you get into the
hyperpolarization because I need I need
there to be a group of thoughts so I
don't have to think through every issue
and contend with all the very
intelligent arguments coming at me from
both sides because they are really smart
people on both sides with really
compelling arguments and one thing I've
learned just as an immutable truth the
reason reason that you end up in a
situation where you have really
intelligent people coming at things from
exactly opposite ends is that there is
truth in both sides and so this is where
then I'm like okay the superstructure I
want for everybody is first principles
what works what actually as we get
closer to the laws of physics and we are
able to accurately predict the outcome
of our Behavior and the behavior of
others you know you're getting closer to
ground level truth and that's like that
would be my fantasy is that we can all
get our heads around that we can say
this is our stated goal what are the
behaviors the cultural inculcations that
we need to do in order to achieve that
so you laid them out what the West has
done the experiment that we've run the
Mind virus of the individual is the
right thing to focus on because that
leads to the seeking of Truth in
scientific Realms etc etc and I think a
whole host of other things that are
probably better not to completely
fractal on right now
so going back to this idea if you've got
all of these perspectives coming at you
very quickly you want to start
bifurcating into teams so that you you
have an anchor you don't have to think
through all these different ideas but
the fascinating thing is even as
everything is being eroded if America
were to be attacked now suddenly you're
in that thing where there is real
hardship there is real pain There's real
suffering when somebody comes and kicks
your front door in with a machine gun
it's like whoa now like this is really
time to react and moments like that I
think would be incredibly galvanizing
but again that comes back to you need
that level of pain and suffering that I
really would love to find a way to avoid
but it's so going back to the idea of
you've got I the the way I've always
always articulated this idea is there is
a god-shaped hole in everyone's heart
now I'm not religious so I don't fill
that hole with God I feel that whole
with Biology so I if there were one
thing I'm trying to get across the world
it is this you are having a biological
experience
your brain works in a certain way
once you understand your brain is
influenced by your gut and that whatever
85 percent of the serotonin in your body
which controls a lot of your mood is
actually made and stored in your gut
like that's so startling to me and
thusly what you eat is going to
influence your mood so now it's like
hey this Divine vehicle that you have
it's a vehicle and it works in a certain
kind of way and if you take care of it
it will work well and if you don't it
won't and so that has left me with this
tremendous sense of awe and this desire
to go Inward and understand how I work
and so that fills that thing for me that
creates a superstructure so that when I
am left with the atomization of I'm an
individual person I start going okay
what are my moral what's my moral
compass my moral compass given what I
just said about biology the individual I
think it will make sense for people that
my moral compass is all about what
increases human thriving and decreases
human suffering right it's going to be
something very tactical tactile it's
gonna come down to what what the
individual is going through
and so
everybody is going to need that thing
for themselves and
I don't think they have that Clarity in
a world where so many ideas are
bombarding them so quickly and the world
that they are in is relatively affluent
and there's nobody with a machine gun
knocking on their door but any any
crisis like that collapses their
ideology down to getting back to First
principles what works in this moment
what keeps me and my family safe right
here right now in this moment it cuts
out all the [__] I don't know if
that made sense but that made perfect
sense except I I would argue it's not
true if you look at what happened during
covet
covid was for a lot of people at least
initially an experience that should have
been that thing that you talk about and
actually I don't know if it was the case
here but in the UK for the first couple
of weeks it legitimately felt like
wow we've all got something
that is affecting all of us that is
scary that is dangerous we don't know
how dangerous we don't know how scary
but what we got to do is work together
look after the vulnerable you know
pull in the same direction it was
exactly the same here it it was like
that
for a few weeks
and then
I
this is going to sound political but
it's not meant political it's just a
statement of fact and then BLM happened
right and then all of the hypocrisies of
how we treat different groups and all of
that stuff
suddenly ruined all of that that's what
I saw right and this isn't any it's not
even an anti-blm point it was just like
you can't have everyone locked in their
homes for weeks and then the moment
people want to protest about a
particular issue now going outside
without a mask and protesting next to
other people is a health intervention
but this proves my point okay because
what happened was in the first few weeks
we thought that there was a guy with a
machine gun kicking down our door and
then and then we realized it's actually
not as bad as we thought but because we
were saying hey this is is as bad or
worse than you think it's going to be
and so you could get away with give me
all the control the authoritarian
control which we need to get into
authoritarianism but but just to finish
this point so uh you need to give me all
the controls this is really bad but then
the reality of it didn't end up being
that and so the virus didn't spread
especially when you were outside and so
or didn't spread as fast it should be
very clear so it didn't spread as fast
when you were outside and so all of the
people who were like oh but this is
going to be crazy if if you're right
this is going to be a super spreader
event and then it wasn't a super
spreader event and so then it was like
is this as dangerous as we think like I
remember dude washing the grocery bags
that would come into my house with
sanitizer sanitizing everything only
buying things that I could that was
either pre-packaged or like sanitize the
outside of I mean lest people forget how
big of a question mark this was and this
is not to take anything away covet
killed a lot of people but it wasn't
like the Spanish Flu of 1918 that killed
whatever 50 million people so
this you have these moments where
you think a guy with a machine gun is
kicking down your door or that you're
being chased by a lion but in in the end
you're not and so it created this really
weird dissonance of people were going
into camps but then they still weren't
forced to figure out what actually works
and so my thing is once you start so I I
really this idea and now I'm speaking as
an entrepreneur and so I'm I'm just in
my zone everything up till now is me
thinking through an idea and I'm very
grateful for people giving me the space
to process but now speaking as an
entrepreneur I will just tell you that
to build a business you must become a
fiendish prediction engine you have to
get very good at if I do this I will get
this result because if I don't I can't
pay people's salary so there there's
just a really cut and dry thing you're
dealing with the market the marketplace
does not care about you like you just
either give something to people that
they want more than they want their
money and you can sell it at a profit or
you don't that's it it's cut and dry and
so in that you really start to go
okay it doesn't matter what I want to be
true like just all that [__] just
it's gone what is true yes and you
become fiendish to figure that out and
the people that end up doing well are
people that get very accurate at going
if I do this thing I'm going to get this
result if I do that thing I'm going to
get that result and they they get into
what I call the physics of progress
I think no matter what you're trying to
accomplish in your life there is a loop
it does not change for anybody that you
have to run through and I mapped this
out and I was teaching it in a business
class and I actually first started
teaching it here to my own staff and one
of the guys on my team goes uh oh that's
the scientific method
I was like oh my God it is a scientific
method and I realized okay when multiple
disciplines come to the same conclusion
from totally different angles the odds
that that thing is useful in generating
a predictive engine is pretty high and
so
when that
prediction engine can break down because
there isn't the level of threat that you
thought this is where all hell breaks
loose that makes sense that makes sense
well let's that makes perfect sense and
let's come back slightly further because
you talked about your own
um
how you fill the god-shaped hole and you
mentioned that for you part of that is
uh human flourishing and avoiding human
suffering the problem is
those things are subjective and they're
also operating on a subjective timeline
uh there is there are things that will
cause human suffering now
that will cause human flourishing 10
years from now write the delayed
gratification yeah so how you define
those things is also subjective which is
why a superstructure cannot within
reside within you it has to be something
pre-political it has to be something
that other people not just agree with
but other people believe almost without
questioning that's what a superstructure
is
um
and religion provided that very very
well for a period of time but we we are
in the in the west only in a somewhat
post-religious age I mean Maybe not
maybe that actually will change over
time but the problem I think we're
having is that you're right to say that
you have a lot of very smart and
well-intentioned people from different
sides not being able to agree and I
think the reason is you know Jonathan
height has obviously written about this
that people with different psychological
profiles and as a result political
Visions
um they value different things and so if
you are left leaning or sort of liberal
leaning uh compassion is going to be
much higher on your list of priorities
whereas someone who's more pragmatic
like you uh is going to say well yes I
have to you know you're a member of my
team and I have to give you a telling
off and say no you [__] this up right
but we're going to work together to make
sure it doesn't happen again so that you
grow as a and then you're more effective
well for some people that's unpleasant
and suffering but if you're interested
in growing a business you know that
sometimes you have to get things
to work properly and part of that means
telling people things they don't want to
hear right we talked about this before
we started
um
and I think that's probably a lot of
where the disagreement is because we
don't have an overarching superstructure
above everybody then you end up in a
position where it's like well if you
want to pursue your version of human
flourishing and I want to pursue my
version of human flourishing they could
look completely differently based on
what we believe to be true about the
world now yes I agree with you that
you've taken a lot of time clearly and
thought very carefully about what it is
that works and doesn't work in the real
world most people haven't
most people haven't and a lot of them
operate on the basis of what makes them
feel good because that's the original
mechanism by which human beings existed
right you feel bad about something you
avoid it you feel good about something
you you pursue it
the world's got more complicated and so
you have to have those Loops that you
talked about but a lot of people don't
operate through them and even if they
did you still probably find them because
people are different psychologically
they value different things and they
Define flourishing and suffering in
different ways which is why I don't
think that's enough
here's an idea I would love to hear what
you think about this so uh
the business world has taught me a lot
about human nature and so I maybe take a
slightly different approach to
everything that's happening right now so
in a business you absolutely need uh two
different types you need a dreamer
Visionary and you need an Executor and
I've seen way too many times really
smart people Constantine really smart
people and one of them is a Visionary
and he thinks the executor is an idiot
and the executor is brilliant and he
thinks the Visionary is an idiot and
you're sitting there watching it going
wait how have you guys gotten this far
without realizing it's the tension
between the two of you that actually
finds the right path and so in business
it's often talked about as the kite in
the string so if you have a kite that
has no string it just flies off into
nothingness crashes into a tree falls to
the ground whatever if you have a string
without a kite obviously just lays on
the ground so you need the two in
Dynamic tension and if the kite were
angry at the string and thought the
string was useless and a fool and the
string that the kite was you know good
for not nothing then it it's just Mayhem
and that's what I feel like is happening
politically and dude I'm not a political
person I never thought I would ever have
a conversation like this or I would ever
need to think through these problems and
then I started realizing oh this is like
the left and right debate again my on my
Tombstone I wanted to read you're having
a biological experience and what I want
people to understand is evolution has
just molded the life out of you and you
are a product of a lot of evolution and
evolution is a hundred percent trying to
make sure that you have kids that
survive long enough to have kids
okay when you've got a lot of lions
chasing you you need a strong group so
there is going to be this nature is
going to make sure that there's cohesion
in a group but what makes for a cohesion
strong individuals Okay cool so we're
gonna have a collectivist versus
individual tension and because if you
don't you get What's called the
freeloader problem so if everybody is
like no man Left Behind like we've got
to take care of everybody from an
evolutionary standpoint you just created
a game theoretic Gap and somebody's
gonna go oh word nobody left behind I'll
be chilling here go get me some food
bring it back group says you have to
take care of me all as well and so if
you had that then everybody everybody
becomes the freeloader and then you die
off so you have to have this
countervailing Force that's like no way
like I I will take care of you but I
need to know that you're going to take
care of me too the next time and so now
you've got the tension between the two
you've got somebody who's like saying
hey
you're accountable for everything your
life is your choice nobody's coming to
save you you better get out there and
hunt then you've got somebody else
that's like yo you can't be like that
you have more than you can eat come on
share with the group and so when you get
the dynamic tension between those two
you have a functioning Society but when
you have each side going you're an idiot
you don't belong here my way is the only
way it devolves into madness yes and so
I will Point people back to being an
entrepreneur which I did not plan to
quote on this so much Ray dalio the guy
mentioned earlier builds the largest
hedge fund in the world
billions and billions of dollars this
guy's crazy his success is ridiculous
and it's all on the back of this
horrendous failure and so he's probably
mid-30s he's the wonderkind like he's
just the guy and he's killing it and he
lays out this whole strategy and he
tells the world like this is what's
gonna happen he puts all in on it chip
start going his way he looks like a
genius and then it stalls and it doesn't
go his way and he loses everything man
he goes from being ultra wealthy to
having having to borrow money to pay
rent and put groceries on his kids table
I mean just the most catastrophic fall
you can imagine and so he's like okay
I'm gonna start all over again and I'm
gonna reboot everything but I'm going to
have one guiding force and that is the
recognition of the fallibility of my
thinking and I am no longer going to see
myself as super smart I'm going to see
myself as somebody who absolutely must
cultivate in others the willingness to
tell me when I'm wrong and why I'm wrong
and so this got me obsessed with free
speech so
I think that we are all
no matter how smart you are literally no
matter how smart you're gonna be blind
to something 100 and if you don't live
in a world where people can tell you are
encouraged that you invite them to tell
you where you're wrong you will implode
at some point do you know what I do with
my guys at trigonometry
I'm always starting arguments
I'm always like so what do you think
about this no but I can see you don't
quite agree with me and and I do this
all the time and this is the beauty of
what you know we have me Francis and our
producer Anton the like the core team
and a bunch of other people and that's
what I've always tried to do because
while it's very tempting to think I'm a
very smart person I also recognize the
different perspectives and people you
know I you said biological experience I
mean the biological experience can drive
you into all sorts of cul-de-sacs both
intellectually and emotionally right
um so that is I couldn't agree with you
more man it's so important that we are
able to
challenge ourselves and be challenged by
others
um to me I I don't actually know a lot
about leadership because it's a new
thing to me having our team and but it's
something I've thought often about which
is I think uh you know that's such a a
difficult balance to strike between
being a strong confident assertive
leader who who has vision and takes the
team forward but also someone who can
not only just hear feedback but actually
encourage it so that it's given in the
first place that's that's kind of what
I've always tried to work on since you
know I remember when we we were about to
hire our first staff member I was
dreading it
I because I knew I wasn't
prepared
but there's only one way to prepare
which is to do it right
um so yeah and free speech is is to
broaden it out as you have
I think that's right
um and that is why you know the
scientific progress we talked about
earlier is a product of that because
it's it's the ability to challenge ideas
how much would you give up for free
speech how far would you let people go
well it depends what you mean because uh
I for example you know in certain
countries in Europe it is illegal to
deny the Holocaust right
um
in constant in land is that is that okay
denying the Holocaust yeah it is to me
yeah and you know I have family who who
died who've died in in that War and who
were Jewish
um I don't personally want to
that but but we we've got ourselves into
a bit of a confusion as a society
because people confuse uh you know you
won't have a holocaust denier on your
podcast that means you don't believe in
free speech that's a slightly different
conversation great but I do think people
should be allowed look this isn't a
popular view particularly uh as someone
who has experienced racism I don't think
it should be illegal to be racist right
to say racist things right it should be
illegal to discriminate against people
because of their race and employment and
then education or whatever but people
should be allowed to have and express
pretty much any opinion in my view I
recognize that's not how other people
think
um do you think that's a like if if the
scales had to tip one way or the other
do we lean more towards people believing
in free speech now in the west or away
from it
well I think the scales is the wrong
metaphor because I think there's some
people who very strongly feel free
speech is important and there are also
some people who feel very strongly that
feelings and you know protecting people
from hearing things they don't like is
very important so I don't know what the
balance of that is because I think those
camps are almost separate they're not
even on the same scale to some extent
right
um I think if you were to poll the
ordinary person it depends country by
country I mean in the UK we have laws
against uh we have a lot it's illegal in
the UK to be grossly offensive
that freaks me out it freaks me out when
did that happen uh I believe it was
brought in under the Blair government
like don't quote me on this I could be
wrong but that's fairly recent right
yeah yeah uh so between 97 and 2010 they
would have come Acro coming at that
point maybe even before but it was never
really robustly enforced if it had been
in place so don't quote me on it but it
it's it's a relatively new occurrence
it's not from the 1800s I I don't
believe so and if it is I don't recall
you know when I was growing up in the UK
I don't remember hearing about people
being you know prosecuted or arrested or
even having the police visit them for
things that they said and and now it's
it happens hmm and it freaks me out
you're right and it should it should
freak us out yeah where do you think
that where where does the denial of free
speech go
well you chartered it perfectly yourself
if we cannot challenge bad ideas bad
ideas Thrive and when bad ideas Thrive
that disconnect between reality
and ideas gets wider and wider
and then you've you and I have both I
think explained where that leads leads
to two
you know the the clash with reality I
mean you can believe that gravity is not
real as long as you want but when you
jump out of a window you're gonna find
out
talk to me about Russia because I think
there's another element to this where
um I watched the movie uh Chernobyl and
it really freaked me out like how being
watched all the time knowing that there
are certain things that you can say and
can't say like what it does to the
psyche and how
um it can lead to a nuclear disaster
because you're not able to speak up
you're not able to just plain and say
hey [__] like I can't do that because
it's gonna [__] melt down
um
you were born in Russia what what does
it do like to the vibe I'm not sure what
the right word is to use but like what
does it do to this society when people
aren't able to just be open and honest
because there's really like fear of
punishment
well a lot of people it's obviously not
comparable but a lot of people know what
that feels like now because a lot of
people worry about expressing their
actual opinions in public and it was
funny because I was just in New York
we've just done a couple of weeks of a
trip around the US and I got invited to
this thing that's rung by a friend of
mine called thought criminals and it's a
small group of people who uh uh could
get together and talk about things that
they believe that they can't talk about
in public or in their work and whatever
and they asked us Francis and I to speak
a little bit and you know I said to them
I've been in this room before
because even in the 1980s I remember as
a little kid running around and you know
my grandfather's kitchen and there would
be you know physicists and biologists
and musicians and artists sitting around
in a small kitchen talking about the
very things that they could not discuss
elsewhere that's a lot of trust man yeah
and it didn't always work out so in my
grandfather's case in one of gatherings
of this kind he criticized the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan
and within very short order he was fired
from his job his wife was fired from her
job and both their children as my father
and my aunt were kicked out of
University
he had the KGB searches house they found
a radio receiver that he used to listen
to BBC World Service and Voice of
America and you couldn't you were not
allowed to this was a terrible crime uh
and So eventually that's actually in
part why I ended up in England because
he couldn't remain in the Soviet Union
and as it was sort of tapering out at
the end he left and went to the UK and
then when my parents had a bit of money
they sent me to boarding school to
England to be there but my point is it
creates and to this day we don't
actually know what people in Russia
think about the war for example we don't
because what polling says isn't
necessarily reflective because Russians
learn and other peoples in the Soviet
Union learn over a long period of time
that you have a public reality you have
a work reality and then you have the
kitchen table reality
and some of these can be in complete
contradiction to each other
and it creates a culture of fear in
which as you say people are afraid to
speak up people are afraid to take
initiative that's the worst thing
imagine a business where people don't
take initiative because they're afraid
how if you you have a bunch of people
working for you how bad would the
product that you produce be if none of
them ever felt able to say actually why
don't we do it like this let's try that
you see what I'm saying if everybody was
constantly worried about protecting
their job
and therefore didn't innovate didn't do
anything different didn't try things
didn't challenge authority didn't
challenge the people above them and so
on like that it's a very stifling
atmosphere and it's extraordinary to me
how successful the Soviet Union was in
competing with the world superpower in
spite of that system it shows you the
incredible talent and intellect of the
people of the former Soviet Union who
really uh you know punched above the way
in my opinion given the terrible
structures that they were operating in
yes this is the thing that scares me and
this is why I think what we're calling
it this will be interesting I'll try to
dissect my own argument here this is the
thing that I find terrifying is that
even in a country like that that has
what I would call very bad ideas they
are able to be successful to a certain
point and so somebody that's gonna
attack me if I were gonna steal man
their argument I would say look at China
look at what they've done look at Russia
look at what they did I mean they for a
long time they were the other superpower
and yes they've had sort of a blip and
for a while they struggled but it's like
you know they're kind of coming back
like depending on how you look at what
Putin is doing he's God this is not me
saying this won't be very clear but like
reunifying you know the the country or
however it's thought of
and so as somebody who has read the
gulag archipelago who's read
um Mao the unknown story who's read the
red famine Jesus uh
[Music]
it really is
it's really distressing depending on
what it is that you value because this
stuff will go on for a long time like a
lot of people died in the red famine but
the country didn't go away like they
still like they managed to like you know
figure some things out and keep going
and even when the Soviet Union fell it's
not like Russia fell into the sea like
they you know they build back in
countries fragment but they start doing
their own thing and so it really comes
down to
what vibe do you get when you think
about and I'll just make this about work
as you were talking I was like oh man
that's actually a really good analogy
the way that I view what happens when
you lose free speech is what most people
experience every day at work where oh
think about how much like you think your
boss is an idiot but you're like I can't
say anything because if I do then I'm
gonna get fired or whatever that's what
it would be like and so I don't know why
people are racing towards it when
they're busy hating their job and they
think you know they work for a [__] but
they can't say anything and they
complain about it and they want out and
they want to do their own thing but yet
there's like this cultural movement that
will yield the same result
so in at impact Theory dude you can't
imagine how many times my own team I've
given the speech nobody here is above
criticism least of all me I am not smart
enough to take us where we want to go I
need people to tell me when I'm going
awry I need people like you are
literally being hired for two things are
you willing and able to make decisions
and stand by them and can you speak to
power because if you can't speak to
power and you're not willing to tell me
what you really think we're going to
crash and burn have you heard about
um South Korean Airlines and how they
used to have the worst safety record in
in the entire industry okay this is
crazy this to me is what happens when
Free Speech goes away so they have a
cultural thing there where you respect
your elders so if the captain outranks
you and you're in the plane uh and
you're the co-pilot and something's
going wrong you can make suggestions but
you can't like Snap him out of it and so
they have these black box recordings do
this Eerie this whole uh documentary of
Black Box reenactments uh of these
famous plane crash there were a couple
in there from South Korea and it goes
like this uh excuse me pilot
um do you think we're getting a little
close to that mountain
no no everything's fine uh excuse me sir
could it be possible that if we were to
pull up that we would be in a better
situation I told you to maintain your
course they are careening towards a
[__] mountain man they eventually
crash into that mountain and at no point
does the co-pilot go hey [__]
we're gonna run into the mountain and we
need to pull up what the [__] are you
doing and
that to me is when you lack Free Speech
you get Chernobyl watch it if you
haven't you get South Korean Airlines
they finally had to do this whole like
cockpit protocol where in the cockpit
you could absolutely it did not matter
hierarchy was gone so whatever like
before you clock in whatever deference
you're showing somebody the second you
clock in that goes away you've got to
say exactly what you think is true
you've got to be assertive you've got to
be willing to call it
and I was just like wow like there are
real consequences when people aren't for
whatever reason
compelled to say what they think is true
and the most beautiful illustration of
that is the movie Crimson Tide have you
ever seen it I have but a long time
Denzel Washington and uh Gene Hackman
yes and that's the whole plot of the
movie It's the captain of the boat
and his EXO and there's a decision to be
made and the EXO is doing everything he
can to prevent a bad decision from being
made by the captain who's chosen a
particular path to pursue on the entire
movie is about that fact
and at the end the way that that whole
thing is shown as being the
the true value of not just Free Speech
but honor in that whole system is
uh what happens is they end up not
launching nuclear weapons at my boys
uh as it was a cold war movie and it
turns out to be the right decision
however there is a mutiny aboard a
nuclear submarine which is pretty big
[__] deal right so there is some kind
of investigation and
the captain is questioned about what
happened but his EXO is not in this
courtroom the military Court martial
whatever it is and they bring in Denzel
Washington who's there EXO and they say
and you know we've made a decision
something like this and he goes what
without my testimony
and they say you know Captain Ramsey
who's the captain of the boat I've known
him for 30 years you know we don't we
don't need to
we don't need to mistrust them right and
the point is
that at the end of that whole process
the captain who fought so hard to have
his decision implemented knows he [__]
up and he's willing to admit it that's
the whole point of the movie right and
the ends by I think the final shot of
the thing is uh since then they've
changed the protocol
on the submarines so that you can't you
need I think you know they've changed
the whole thing basically right so you
no longer have that conflict which is
exactly what you're talking about right
it's situation someone speaks up that
speeches eventually heard
people cling more to what's important
over what is in their own personal
interest right because there's a bigger
thing at stake and lessons are learned
that's that's like the whole thing in in
a movie that's why free speech is
important because it prevents you from
making mistakes in the future
you've said that every generation has to
fight for free speech again why what
what is this so I'm this is my bias
there's some biological thing that makes
people want to shut down free speech for
whatever reason and then there's some
biological reason why people want it on
the other side now I think we've made a
pretty com we've laid out why it can be
wildly problematic to not have Free
Speech but what's the pull on the other
side why why does every generation have
to fight this over and over
well free speech is kind of unpleasant
isn't it
isn't it it can be man so no it is it is
I mean when we think in what way because
people say things that make you go oh
yeah that was kind of stupid of me uh or
they just say things that you don't like
or they express opinions you don't agree
with right for example I feel very
strongly about what's happening in
Ukraine yep right
so for me hearing people saying horrible
[__] about ukrainians who are fighting
for their lives and calling them Nazis
and lying about that whole situation it
upsets me or it could do if I let it and
at some points I let it it's a fact
what if I could just press a button and
then none of these people ever say any
of that again wouldn't my life be so
much more improved right definitely not
but that could be because I'm already so
far down the path yeah so you understand
that my life would not be improved but a
lot of people don't understand that
because it's reaction stimulus reaction
that's all it is oh I feel bad okay shut
it down right that's how a lot of people
feel about life in general because most
people as you well know don't go through
life not feeling in control
and so when a thing happens that you
don't want to experience
that's what happens that's what it's
it's a quite a natural instinct and so
in many ways I would argue free speech
is very unnatural
it's a very unnatural thing and that's
why it has to be fought for repeatedly
because people it's always tempting to
go to the shut it down I don't like to I
don't want to hear this you know and
also you know if your ego is invested
this is the hardest thing for people who
do what you do and do what I do you know
whether you run a small YouTube channel
or a massive business
everyone has an element of ego that
takes ages to get rid of you know to
process and to to and so
it's a it's a challenge to Your Ego to
have people challenge the things that
you uh uh are saying or believing or
thinking and it's only when you
transcend that and you go this is about
something bigger than me this is what
you said about the speech you give your
team right you said if we're gonna get
to where we want to go
then you have to be able to challenge me
but if all we are trying to do is get to
where I want to go
maybe I don't need to hear your crappy
opinion about how I'm doing it well
maybe I just need you to suck up to me
so that we carry on doing stuff that
makes me feel good
an owner will never do that a successful
owner will never do that because they
know that at the end of the day the
rubber meets wrote If you get a company
I guess that's like finally hit escape
velocity and it's just making enough
money then you can start being stupid
but this is why the average company now
stays in the S P 500 is I think for 12
years it used to be 61. right if you
made it to the S P 500 baby gravy train
61 years now 12. bananas
so anyway there's just a death spiral
that happens when you uh want people to
suck up it's really interesting so I
came to being a CEO through a very weird
way I started as a copywriter worked my
way to partner in one company then tried
to quit that company and so they made me
an equal partner in the next company
long story my audience has heard me tell
the story a thousand times uh and so
that
I was like I clawed my way to the top in
in a very uh
emotionally difficult environment that
was the intellectual equivalent of
Thunderdome like we actually used to say
that this is not me like making it up it
was like one man or two men enter one
man leaves like we used to talk about
that all the time and so it it really
was meant in some ways to be that
difficult uh and so as I looked at it
and was like how much of this works how
much of it doesn't there were some ideas
that were brilliant like challenge me
uh other ideas that were less likely to
make it with me when I was on my own uh
and like well like I realized very
quickly that I need to give my power
away so my job in getting to the CEO
position is not to flex and show
everybody how powerful I am my job at
getting to CEO was to empower everybody
else so that it could scale and that is
very difficult to do to claw your way to
that role and then be like hey actually
for me to get where I want to go I have
to in some ways in some ways it actually
be really interesting it would take us
hours to really explain what running a
business is but in many ways your your
sub um you're submitting yourself to
your employees and you're saying uh one
we I actually don't refer to my
employees as my employees just
psychologically I don't it's not the
right move so we refer to each other as
teammates yeah that's right Michael
the psychological thing that does I
think is very important we also give
Equity to our team so it's like hey you
actually really own a piece of this
company so now it's like we're pulling
for the same thing we're teammates
you're not my family I'm holding you to
a standard I absolutely expect you to
perform well uh I consider myself to
need to be
um
as good as a human could be at my
position so I know what my position is
I'm not I'm not interested in being
micromanager but I have to like hey how
are things going for you I want to make
sure that you have the way that I refer
to myself as I'm the soil you guys are
the things that are going to grow and so
my job is to create the soil here that
freedom of speech challenge authority
all of that stuff is incredibly
important to create that kind of
um Vibe so that you can ultimately get
the things you want to go but as that
one to create that is very difficult
because I think and this is the next
thing I want to talk about
that there is part of the reason I think
that people have to fight for free
speech every generation is that there is
innate in humans partly because of ego
partly because of fear partly because of
insecurity partly because it's awesome
is a drive for totalitarian style
control yeah and I've often thought it's
really good that I'm not smart enough to
lead this company in a dictatorial
fashion because if I were right like say
85 of the time I could probably get away
with it but the reality is that I'm not
and so I never worked with Steve Jobs so
maybe I'm wrong this is just mythology
but I have a feeling he was just smart
enough that he could just like slap
people around be absolutely horrible
tell them what to do and it still worked
they built an amazing company and so
very few people were like he's a lot of
fun to work for so I can't do that I
can't deploy that methodology because if
I'm addicted to you I'm going to be
wrong way too frequently and now I'm
just going to Hemorrhage human capital
so anyway I think that's a big part of
the the pool pull is that uh being a
dictator feels awesome telling people
does it see I people say that but
look I I've never been inside another
human being's skin obviously but
it's insecurity provoking is that where
you're going no I why it doesn't feel
good why not because you're making other
people feel bad
do you think they see that
yes because some of them like when I
heard stories about uh Saddam Hussein's
son yeah yikes yeah so I suppose there
are some Psychopaths and they probably
accumulated the top of Fortune 500
companies
um
it's weird to me I've never I've never
been because uh I fear in myself the the
instinct to authoritarianism but when I
actually started managing art team I
quickly realized that I actually didn't
need to fear that at all because I'm
actually the opposite I have to force
myself to say things that might not be
pleasant for them but that need to be
it's something I have to overcome all
the time I I do not enjoy making other
people feel bad one bit and I don't say
that's the only part of being a dictator
though it's not because when you run a
company I like knowing I'm the one
person that can't be fired they can all
quit and I think I think people working
at a company underestimate how brutal
that is but they can't fire me
that feels nice it well yeah but does
that make you a dictator though there's
no limit of that I have the the quote
unquote totalitarian control over my
company people are going to do what I
say and It ultimately it forces you into
a George Washington position where it's
like I could keep this power but I
actually am going to give it away and in
the way that he gave it away because he
felt it was the right thing for the
country and it's probably good that he
was as old as he was because he was just
like Jesus Christ this is a pain in the
ass yeah and I would really like to
retire to my farm now uh
there there is something about
that feeling of like as long as the
company is making money and I can't be
fired this is why I don't take money I
don't take outside money because then
you can be fired the board can fire you
and I would hate that anyway I get your
point it's it's a mixed bag
and I suppose the fact is that as we
talked about people have different
psychological profiles there are some
people who are Psychopathic right
um
we're talking about solitarianism though
why we always have to fight every
generation for free speech
which is not natural
that's why it's it's not a natural state
of being I think I don't think that in
in the ancestral environment in the
tribe of 150 people there was a huge
amount of free speech
you know what I mean
um so I think it's a quite artificial
idea in some ways uh that's why it
hasn't been around for very long because
in historical terms I mean the idea that
freedom of expression matters is sort of
a few hundred years old at best actually
I've never really been properly
implemented anyway even in those times
now look the reason we keep banging on
about Free Speech we should acknowledge
this as well is the technological
environment is very different
uh a word said in private 200 years ago
really probably didn't have a huge
amount of impact on
how people thought and fell and whatever
you say something on Twitter now
it could be seen by hundreds of millions
of people and have far-reaching
implications so even though language
hasn't changed that much the impact of
language has and I can see why you know
I don't believe there's ever going to be
a free internet again
you know there was a there was a there
was a gold rush moment in of the
internet do you remember it when you say
free you mean uncensored yeah yeah
that's not gonna happen again it's just
the technology is too powerful
nobody would allow that uh what do you
think about what Elon is doing with
Twitter
What specifically
yeah that's interesting so the way that
I see it is him taking over this thing
making it open source so people are not
open source but
um transparent so everybody can see what
the algorithm is and
um there's no mystery about who's
getting blocked or why
and that part of it I like and that part
of it I like but I think
um I've not I never met Elon I actually
did Bill Marshall with him today but we
didn't get a chance to talk so I don't
know what he's like I've never met him
and I'm just saying this is an outside
Observer and I actually think he's a
very important figure in the culture and
what he's attempting to do in terms of
the survival of humanity actually really
important I disagree with him about
certain things
but you have to be honest and recognize
that Twitter is a benevolent
dictatorship which is much better than
the
oligarchy we had before it is better but
I see that there is you know any
dictatorship is benevolent as long as
it's benevolent right
um so you know for example
Twitter I think is in a bit of a
standoff with sub stack at the moment
which if someone who writes on sub stack
I find it a little bit frustrating
what's the standoff uh the standoff is
that substance came up with a thing
called substack notes which I think the
people at Twitter believe is an attempt
to compete with Twitter
which I don't think it is given that sub
stack I think have you know like 35
million subscriptions versus whatever
Twitter has you know they're not
comparable but
um there's been some things that
happened on that front that make me you
know
make me think that you know I really
wish this dictatorship remained
benevolent for as long as possible is he
throttling sub-stack people or something
like if you're trying to link out to it
or
I don't have access to the actual data
to be able to say accurately there was a
period of time it was quite short when
if you posted a sub stack link on
Twitter you would actually if you
clicked it it would be it would take you
to a page of saying this link is unsafe
interesting and if you tweeted a link to
to sub stack you couldn't like or
retweet it you could only quote tweet it
so it was direct suppression right this
happened for a very short period of time
and then we are in the position where we
are now where some people say
suppression is going on quietly and some
people say it's not um yeah
interesting well if he makes a code
available people real fast point out
whether that's really happening or not
yeah but that's interesting okay so free
internet was a moment going away
um it becomes a very interesting
question getting back to do we want
freedom of speech how far in uh kiss and
land we're gonna go what we're gonna do
so grateful I'm not Elon I cannot tell
you just the pressure or what that
decision that specific one decision is
like where's that line nobody knows
nobody knows because once you go from
anyone's allowed to express an opinion
which I genuinely believe like you and I
sitting here without the cameras on if
you want to be racist I may not stick
around but I believe you have a right to
say that right hmm
what about when that is recorded on
camera and it goes out to millions of
people what if I say as David Ike this
conspiracy guy in the UK said at the
beginning of the pandemic that kovid is
caused by 5G and then the next day
people go out and burn down five gmasks
right you know that I was abhorred I
found a decision to that's not probably
not even a word I found the decision to
ban Trump from Twitter abhorrent yeah
but I can also if I'm being
intellectually honest I opposed it
completely and I said it at the time I
can find it in my mind the situation in
which a leader of a democratic country
in my opinion should be banned from the
Public Square really yeah give me an
example
well it's obvious if they're inciting
large-scale Mass violence for example
they're saying you know what we need to
do is go out and shoot these people
right now I don't think Putin tweets but
would you do them if you did because
there is a guy oh God I follow him I
forget his name on the Russian side
because I was like oh my God like he's
tweeting what he really thinks about the
West this is crazy yes he drinks a lot
and I was like whoa like this guy's just
not pulling any punches like these
idiots and all this I was like wow like
okay this is why I'm saying I'm grateful
not to be in the position where I have
to make these decisions because I think
at the end of the day because there's no
right answer there's no right answer no
we're all fighting over where that line
is and my argument is that line has been
pushed way in against free speech I
think that's elon's point and that's why
he's taken over Twitter and that's why
he's rolling that line back but
inevitably there will always be a point
where you go okay that's far enough I
think yeah because the technology is too
powerful now the impact of words is so
cat is not but can be so catastrophic
yeah but then again I can see counter
against my own argument I mean think
about you know
what about the Civil War in America a
bunch of people saying you know we must
end slavery and if people want to fight
us over that we've got to go out and
fight what if that happened today what
if people went out and said you know we
gotta fight whatever
and that means we need to pick up our
weapons and go to the streets
do you interfere with that as the owner
of Twitter
man so right can I can I throw some
really bad ideas that I man I'm thinking
through this I've not had to to
articulate this stuff to myself or
anybody else but so here's where I come
down on this
um
there are no Solutions only trade-offs
so says Thomas soul
I think that is so important for people
to understand that what whatever
solution people think they have there's
it is always going to create some kind
of problem right and so there there
isn't Utopia there isn't perfection so
knowing that I would say that there
really do have to be some things that
you think
are worth dying for remember I'm I am
thinking through this right now so I
would die for my wife I hope it never
comes to that I am inspired by people
that would die for their country or
whatever I I have to I'd have to really
think about like I am very glad that
like I am not at a conscriptable age at
this point that doesn't break my heart
uh I certainly
love America
I I will actively think people that
fought for America I will thank them for
their service I have a tremendous sense
of
um gratitude for people that have died
for this country and died for its ideals
like it just whoa like that really hits
me at a deep emotional level and I know
it's become like uncool at this point
like I remember somebody told me they
put an American flag up in front of
their house I was like oh someone's
gonna rip that down and they did and
when I said I was like [__] that's
really heartbreaking anyway so you need
to have things you would die for and
that means to me this is me that there
there are some ideas that you do your
best to predict the outcome of having
those implemented and you say that idea
is so strong for the value system that I
hold that I'd be willing to die for it
I grew up in the milieu of the West in
America and our
um Constitution and the First Amendment
and so for me like free speech it's one
of those things man where it's like God
I really hope that it doesn't come to me
having to die for it and I really hope
that it isn't me that the mob turns on
like trust me I'm I'm insecure about
that and I don't want to come across
with like Bluster or who the [__]
cameras I really care like I see
um oh yeah yeah why do you care okay so
sorry I love it I think in fractals I
try to to stop myself from doing it but
you're introducing a fractal that I love
so here's why I care
I have worked
face to face with the reality that the
number one predictor of your future
success is your ZIP code that has become
an animating factor in my life because
people that I loved were devoured by the
bad ideas that were passed on to them by
their zip code and
I I've looked closely enough at the
problem that I realize it's it is ideas
and if you look at
um Jeffrey Canada and what he's done
with his charter schools and stuff where
he takes the same kids in the same
school literally the same building
doesn't choose them based on Merit it's
completely randomized based on the same
kids that go to that school and and they
end up having like five times the
graduation rates and better scores
[__] crazy so
I'm very confident that this is an
idea's problem because I believe that
this is an ideas problem I have tried to
come up with a solution my solution is
the company impact Theory the reason
it's called impact theory is because my
theory on how to impact people at scale
is by getting across a growth mindset
which I really believe is all you need
at scale through ideas and entertainment
this show is is my way of impacting the
two percent and then the video game I'm
making is my way of impacting the 98 and
buried in this video game are just
growth mindset ideas I never I'm not
trying to make vegetables taste good
I think we make a fun game but it
happens like if a mentor gives you
advice in our game it'll be real advice
so it's like okay that's what I'm trying
to build and I worry that I will taint
my own brand because we just live in a
divisive moment and so I have often
thought do I do more good by receding
into the background and nobody knows who
the hell I am nobody has to think about
what I like and believe and all that and
they can just interact with my
characters
or do I step out front now the realities
of my business because it is so hard and
so expensive to build that side of the
business that I I have to do this side
of the business which makes us just a
metric ton of money so uh we have that
whole side and so the second part of
this the reason that I'm In conflict is
that I feel a moral obligation to two
things not be a coward which I started
to feel like a coward at the beginning
of the pandemic and I realized I believe
things and I'm not saying out loud so
I'm effectively in the Soviet Union and
then two
um
I really need to do everything I can to
help people that the ideas would benefit
and so I had ideas that I thought would
be useful to people I had access to
people that had even better ideas than
I'll ever have that could help people
and by not reaching out to those people
and asking those questions it made me
feel like a coward so I was like okay
I have to start speaking on this and
that's why that makes sense that makes
sense but I suppose the reason I asked
is I was just wondering why someone in
your position where you have
Fu money
and a huge audience and a network of
people that I imagine most of would
stick by you if you expressed your very
reasonable opinions uh why you would be
concerned about doing any of that
uh because the reality is that I am not
I I am very aware that I would not do
well pandering to an audience and so if
I say something that lights the world on
fire I'm still going to live in a world
of nuance and I that will be very rough
I would at that point
you have to pick the side that doesn't
hate you if you want to keep making a
lot of money and really yeah yeah you
don't agree with that I don't know I
don't know I mean I deliberately piss
parts of my audience off all the time
because I don't I don't a lot of people
come come to our show because we debate
controversial ideas discuss
controversial ideas we get people from
extremes coming in and I'm quite clear
about whether demarcation lines are for
me because I don't want to end up in a
position where it's like I think I'm you
know I've got a YouTube channel with
Francis that's got you know 10 million
subscribers and it actually only has
like a hundred thousand loyal ones you
know I'd rather know now do you see what
I mean yep so
um from but I also happen to believe
that there are millions and millions and
millions of people out there who like
and would enjoy and truly get what we do
in a way that means that they would
continue to support us even if we said
some things that a lot of people out
there didn't like but if they were
coming from the right place
but again is that a true belief or is
that just a is that wishful thinking I
don't know you're a much better position
to tell me well it's interesting so I
don't know if I'm in a better position
to tell you on that because I haven't
run this experiment but I have had these
conversations with my team who are so to
your point I there I every word that I
say on this show I believe but I am far
more aggressive off camera than I am on
camera I'm far more flippant and lean
towards making something funny or
whatever and so my team loves that and
they have been desperate like to
record that side of me where it's just
like you know completely Unleashed and
like we're having a what I thought was a
[__] hilarious conversation yesterday
about raising AI children which I
actually think is going to be real yeah
uh and my team was
um very much like yeah this would be the
kind of stuff like we want to hear you
go ham like this uh on camera and I'm
like
so take so we my wife and I do
relationship content
and off camera when I say so I used to
be a stand-up comic I don't know if you
have if you've ever heard that side of
me so I know you did as well I tell very
recently I guess you've sort of pressed
pause on that
um probably two or three years ago now
so okay so you were like a for real
stand-up comic I was a wannabe stand-up
comic in my teens and early 20s and
I would my whole stick was I would talk
about the most outlandish [__] the stuff
we like I can't what the [__] nobody
talks about that and so that that's like
I have that natural part of my
personality but I'm trying to be the
next Walt Disney I'm not trying to be
the next uh Tony Robbins or the next uh
Joe Rogan I'm trying to be the next Walt
Disney and I was like going to the
relationship content people always want
to ask us about sex now in my real life
I am not I'll make your eyelids curl
back like I have no problem talking
about it doesn't faze me at all but I
can't escape this question do people
want footage of Walt Disney talking
about a sex life and I'm like I don't
know that I want that and so my my love
man and I I really love it and it's
silly and childish but you'll notice I
have a cartoon character on my shirt and
this is a character I thought of and
there's nothing that gets me more
excited than like I've written comic
books and when somebody writes in and
it's like
dude that comic like it I loved it so
much it really like impacted me you know
this idea was so cool and so
entertaining that I I almost wish it
didn't that impacts me more than the
person who's like oh my God that uh
episode you did or
um you know if I do solo content they're
like oh man now I'm using that idea and
I've taught it to my kids and that stuff
is Meaningful to me but
my just first love and passion is
storytelling and so I am very conflicted
about like how ham to go on thinking
through all of these ideas live on
camera but I find myself just inching
and inching and inching that way so
anyway to to the initial point the
initial question about
um does this become
problematic in any way to
deal with these topics or bring this to
the Forefront
I don't know maybe it does given what
I'm trying to accomplish it is a little
bit sticky you can reboot your life your
health even your career anything you
want all you need is discipline I can
teach you the tactics that I learned
while growing a billion dollar business
that will allow you to see your goals
through whether you want better health
stronger relationships more successful
career any of that is possible with the
mindset and business programs and impact
Theory University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started today
that's very interesting to me it's an
interesting conversation which I think a
lot of people who are making things in
the online space who are by virtue of
what they do in the public eye to some
extent uh have to think about it's
interesting you mentioned about the
cartoon character because it sounds like
to me the reason the praise of that
lands with you in a different way is
that it's the most quintessentially
authentic expression of your true being
interesting not quite true okay so the
most authentic expression of my true
being will come out in multiple ways so
the thing that I love being on stage
talking about mindset mindset and
business like if you get me going on
either of those dude because this is
where I'm like I almost feel like I
can't talk fast enough because I know
these ideas will change anybody's life
they are Timeless ideas I'm just like
this is so cheesy but I'm just the
vessel right now that happens to know
how to package these ideas in a way that
people find useful but dude I took
myself from scrounging my couch cushions
to find enough change to put gas in my
car true story to selling a company for
a billion dollars that I built with my
partners from absolute [__] scratch
we did not raise money and so I'm like
okay the only reason I was able to do
this is because of a set of ideas I can
teach this to you I've now built three
companies in a row and three totally
Divergent areas all of them have been
multi-million dollar companies one of
them was a billion dollar company so
it's like oh my God like take notes get
get up so I love doing that but
the act of being on stage is not as
emotionally captivating as losing myself
inside of a story and so whatever weird
Twist of brain fate I am a hyper
responder to stories movies TV shows
cartoons video games hyper responder and
so I would have been like in days of old
I would not have been a good warrior I'm
I don't have the physicality for that
um I would have been the Storyteller for
sure I would have been the one around
the campfire that built a mythology and
just really
one understood the Deep psychological
impact of story
and just I get the chills from hearing
stories and telling stories and and so
there's there's a secondary layer that I
don't fully even understand in myself
that makes me love the story side that
makes sense hmm
okay so
um
I want to know I want to get back to the
central idea of if you were in fact this
is the right way to ask it you have a
child you have a son you want him to
grow into a good World your Oxford
speech was really uh Reaching Across to
people that
believe in ideology that you think will
lead them somewhere that isn't helpful
to them or to society so while I
understand you don't want to be Elon
Musk and you don't want to be making
some of these decisions give me the
broad Strokes of what you think makes
for a good Society
well this is the point that I was going
to make a lot earlier when you were
talking about how you know what works
and this is one of the difficulties that
we find ourselves in because the moment
I start saying to you here are the
things that work I know you can hear
them but a lot of people out there don't
hear them in the way that they're
intended which is you say growth mindset
right this if you want these results
this is what you do
for society that's a much more difficult
and B one of the problems that you end
up having is your
it necessitates the making of
generalized statements about people and
humanity and Society these things are
generally speaking good and we are now
in a position where the moment I say
that for example you and I before we
started we talked about most people
should have children something it was
maybe foreign
and I agree with that
but the moment you say that particularly
if you say it online a lot of people are
going to come along and give you some
very legitimate examples of people in
situations in which that isn't true
and the one of the big challenges that
we face is it's impossible to make any
sort of generalized normative statement
because those counter examples will
immediately be used against you and
usually we're in a weaponized way so for
example
one of the I mean one of the themes of
today it seems to me are mutual on
shared love not mutual but shared love
of Thomas soul
one of the the key messages that he
expressed and it was then communicated
by other people who picked up on it
particularly from the black community
was the idea of the importance of a and
what we used to call an intact family
parents living together Under One Roof
with their children
people have different explanations of
why that is no longer the case nearly as
much as it used to be some people say
it's a consequence of the sexual
Revolution some people will say it's a
concept you know Thomas himself I think
would say that it's a consequence of the
welfare state you can slice that 100
different ways or maybe not 100 but a
few
but if you say
one of the good things that will make
Society better is children growing up in
in a two-parent household
most often with a man and a woman
which allows them to learn the
stereotypes and the ways of Behaving and
blah blah blah blah well you've
immediately excluded and this is the
worst thing you can do in modern society
you have excluded a whole lot of people
who also have value and dignity and so
on and so forth so
that is why we're in the predicament
that we're in and I as someone
you know you ask exactly the right
question I struggle to answer it
actually because
um it's very very difficult to talk
about some of these things without
immediately finding yourself in a
position where you're being attacked by
people on what actually seemed like
pretty reasonable grounds you know why
why are you sitting there Constantine
telling other people to have or not have
children why are you sitting there
telling you know demon you know
demonizing single mothers why are you
sitting there you know saying that this
type of family unit is better than that
type of family you know when we're all
unique special individuals who have the
right to blah blah blah blah so it's
difficult and
I know this do you think there's an
answer to that question though to which
question what you just asked why are you
doing this like if somebody asked me
that question yeah well the the my
answer to that is uh I believe that for
example if we talk about family unit
um children that's I mean it's not that
I believe there's
and and inescapable Avalanche of
evidence which shows that children
growing up outside of that environment
do infinitely worse on average now it's
on average there are single mothers or
single fathers who bring up their
children wonderfully there are children
who grow up and care who go on to to
have incredible lives or fulfillment and
success there are all sorts of counter
examples but on average
a child growing up in a stable family
environment is far more likely to do
better at school to avoid going to
prison and all sorts of other things
right so
uh that's the reason if you don't want
children to suffer and if you want to
have a cohesive society that is why I
would make that statement right
um it feels to me like you could append
look I know that reality is going to
slap me in the mouth because I'm about
to say this and I'm going to read the
comments people are going to be like
he's a [__] [__] uh
uh so but I will say that seems super
reasonable to me so I'm the biology guy
so I'm like oh this is about first
principles this is about data and if you
just append one thing we're gonna we're
gonna run the experiment because you
just laid out your argument I'm just
gonna append one thing and we're gonna
see if people are like word these guys
finally cracked it
um if you are outside of that you're a
gay couple you're a single mother single
father or whatever
um you still have dignity and I'm so
excited for you that you have children
and
um you might be in a position where
there are things you're going to have to
take into consideration that you just
have to deal with right so if I'm riding
in a car versus driving a motorcycle I'm
gonna act differently they're both going
to get me to my destination and if I'm
careful they're safe I will get people
there safely maybe one has like a track
record cars are a little bit safer or
maybe even a lot safer than motorcycles
but what I need to know is what are the
if I'm on the motorcycle I want you to
tell me what the risks are because I'm
on the motorcycle so now I need to act a
little bit differently maybe there are
things that I need to do maybe even as
the the traditional couple maybe there
are blind spots that we have and you can
help me understand what those are I'm
not saying these are morally better I'm
just saying the data shows that there
are outcomes that are better and so this
is what I'm always trying to get people
to understand in business you have to
know the metric of success so hey
everybody having kids gay straight
single uh wherever doesn't matter what's
the outcome that you want you want your
kids to do well economically emotionally
all of the above whatever okay cool now
let's just look at the data what choices
are most likely to get you there if you
can't make that choice either because
you love somebody else that doesn't fit
that mold or uh you lost your
significant other whatever there's a
million reasons uh where you find
yourself in one of the ones that's maybe
a higher risk group it doesn't make you
bad but you don't want to be blind to
those risks you I would hope want
somebody to tell you okay hey you have
certain things you're going to need to
address and and really be thoughtful of
so for instance this all started from
before we started rolling I said most
people should have kids I am not having
kids and so the reason that I brought it
up was I know that I'm playing what I
consider a high risk game I think it's
emotionally high risk because Evolution
has said hey I'm going to make having
children hyper rewarding to make sure
that you do it and so so much of our
circuitry is is around the expectation
from an evolutionary perspective that
you will have a child so if you don't
there can be a lot of loneliness a sense
of not having meaning and purpose
nothing is living beyond you and so you
know did I waste my life and all of
those questions come with a really tidy
answer if you have kids now it's not to
say that raising kids isn't brutally
difficult and I understand that and
that's why I don't say everybody should
just saying like Nature has made that
one maybe a little bit easier to find
fulfillment than the not having
so I have to my wife and I talk a lot
about how do we protect ourselves from
next I think when we're 80 and running a
business isn't cool anymore and we're
not like you know caught up in what
we're building and maybe I just never
managed to build the next Disney and so
I feel now like a failure I never pulled
it off and you know so now I'm really
struggling so I'm like we need to be
thoughtful about that now so that we
know how to frame our life think about
our life all of that when we're older so
that this doesn't become an emotionally
devastating choice we made we need to do
it with our eyes wide open Etc so that
feels like
the very
I would say wise argument that you've
made that they're just the data shows
there are higher risks here there if you
add the caveats this isn't a moral thing
this isn't me saying that that you're
not worthy of Love or whatever but so
often people want to be right they maybe
aren't a good messenger for that
I think that's certainly true and um
it's a rebuke that I willingly accept I
don't always phrase things in the best
way that I could sometimes
however
you're operating at a level of
Detachment from emotion that most people
are not
um and one of the problems that
all people face really is that we all or
certainly most people I think you're
you're
your circumstances are quite different
to the average person I think we don't
we both agree right
um most people are operating at a level
of unhappiness with their choices or
things that they experience without
maybe realizing that the consequences of
the choices that makes it very difficult
for them to accept
data because if the data says you [__]
up it's quite uncomfortable
and there's nothing you can do
right so for example
you know I I mentioned something about
um the way that women
uh in modern society on Twitter I don't
know if you saw this
um have
what I was trying to say what I was
trying to get across is essentially
women don't actually have the true
freedom to make a choice because they're
about having a kid yes because there are
cultures tell me more because there are
cultural settings that say some some
paths for women are better than others
so if you are a housewife that is not as
high status as having a high-powered
career very traumatic in my eyes but yes
very it it's devastating that that's
become sort of this thing completely uh
and it isn't the fall of women by the
way although it is made often other
women that will react that way but it's
also the fault of men too like we're
both sexes are complicit in this
um but
if you are a 44 year old woman
who maybe you feel you I I don't know if
it's objectively true necessarily but
let's say you feel subjectively that you
did your best you know you you went out
and you dated guys and you did your best
to work on the relationship but they
were [__] or this happened or that
happened or one of them got killed by a
car or whatever and here you are you're
44 years old you haven't had a child and
here's some [__] on the internet
telling you to have children when you're
not going to have them right
that level of Detachment that you have
which is to go well you know we're not
having children here are the
consequences here are some of the
actions I can take to mitigate that that
is not that people so there's not
something that a lot of people have
uh and that's why the conversation
becomes very very difficult because
there's a lot of emotional attachment to
what people are saying you know
um and it they're probably things that
I'm like that about you know you tell me
this or that and I'm I might react
emotionally I I know that that is not
effective and so I work on it over time
and I've certainly got a lot better but
I think a lot of people are not in that
position that you're talking about where
they're truly conscious of the choices
that they're making and their true
consequences you know so that's one of
the reasons it makes all of these
conversations very difficult and
Jordan Peterson is working on something
called The Arc I think and there are
other people who are talking about what
is our positive Vision what's the arc
it's I think I I haven't looked too
deeply into it I'll probably end up
being involved in somewhere but it's
essentially what I've been talking about
for some time which is what is that
positive vision and the reason I'll be
honest with you I am
uh first of all I'm not smart enough to
come up with the whole whole thing on my
on my own and also I'm also kind of a
little bit not brave enough too to come
up with the whole thing of my own
because the amount of [__] you're gonna
take for starting to articulate some of
these things oh my God right I don't
want Jordan Peterson's life that looks
really brutal no it's terrible uh and so
I I don't want to be the only one uh
saying it which is why I think we're a
group of people to be talking about it
and that's why I'm super excited
particularly on the children's stuff
with people like Louise Perry and Mary
Harrington
Louise Perry I feel like I've heard that
name she wrote a book called
um
the case against the sexual Revolution I
think I think oh yes I think uh Jordan
interviewed her right yeah and I've been
we've interviewed her on trigonometry
um her and Mary Harrington are these two
feminists but of a very particular kind
uh Mary's books called feminism against
progress
yes I think I listened to your interview
on that yeah I think you'd have a
wonderful conversation with both of them
I'm too chicken
it's like what do you want the channel
to be about yeah I know what you mean
Louise particularly you know Mary is
very intellectual almost to the
detriment of sometimes getting her
message across she's a wonderful human
being and her ideas are fascinating but
Louise for me you know I sing her
Praises everywhere because to me she's
like a female Jordan Peterson hmm and
she can get away with a lot more because
of that you know but fundamentally you
know one of the things we're gonna have
to reckon with is we've as a society we
was a civilization even we've
we've unpicked a lot of the the threads
of the sweater that used to hold the
sweater together
religion family children all of these
things
um
and
we are going to have to think about what
a what a new sweater looks like
and it has to be I feel you know I
explained to you why why there's good
reason to be cowardly about saying a lot
of these things which is why we have to
frame it in a different way that is
Invitational it can't be you must have
children
that doesn't work anymore
maybe it never will I mean maybe it did
work 100 years ago maybe it did work for
most people most of the time
it has to be more like
what you're talking about which is
what do you want
what do you truly truly want because
let's be honest going out to parties and
getting drunk and taking drugs and
having casual sex isn't making you
fulfilled I'm sorry if this sounds like
a conservative idea I'm sorry I wish I
didn't have to articulate these ideas
that sound conservative because then
people call me conservative and then
they get an end up in the box but the
fact of the matter is we all know that
is a fact these things do not make you
fulfilled and happy in the long run they
just don't right so what is it that you
want what is it that every human being
wants you talked about it I can't
remember if it was before we started
Rafters meaning and fulfillment right
how are you gonna get there
here are some things that people have
done in the past to get those things
meaning and fulfillment how do you get
that well
for some people that's going to be
meaningful work right but not
everybody's going to have that
opportunity for some people it's going
to be a family not everyone's going to
have that opportunity but here is a menu
with a few options with a few options
that that we can offer you as a human is
is the body of human uh knowledge about
these things that's what I think it has
to be looked like it has to look like
and look if you don't want to sign up to
this that's fine but deep down everybody
wants meaning and fulfillment here are
some of the ways to get that um
man I think that's that is critical
meaning and fulfillment really is the
punch line I am often trying to get
people to understand all that ultimately
matters is how you feel about yourself
when you're by yourself and
the way that you feel good about
yourself is basically following the
guidelines of fulfillment which I think
there's a recipe for and it goes
something like this again Evolution guy
over here so you evolution is going to
guarantee that if you do the following
things you will be fulfilled and if you
don't you won't no matter what don't
care how rich you are you're gonna have
to work really hard to gain a set of
skills that allow you to serve yourself
and others in a way that you find
exciting if you do that your life will
be awesome if it comes easily to you you
won't have the things you want if you
work really hard but only Serve Yourself
you won't have the things you want like
their nature is trying to make sure that
you have kids that stay alive long
enough to have kids that have kids so
it's like that that's the drill and that
is as far as I can tell that's the
formula that's going to make you feel
that way so in the working hard and all
that is where you earn your own respect
earning your own respect is about having
a value new system you say these are the
things that are worthy of respect and
I'm going to do these I think the only
feedback loop is the pursuit of
fulfillment so anyway if you're doing
things to earn your own respect then I
think you'll feel good about yourself
and you're by yourself even if you're
failing as a whole I've got a whole
stick about how to construct your
mindset to be resilient Etc et cetera
beyond what we're talking about right
now where does raising children
particularly if you're a woman fit into
that okay so and family generally so
this is where you
if you think about
all like what I'm trying to do is the
grand scale version of what having a
family is and I think if the
um if the individual is the right level
of analysis for your own life for the
government to think about the its
constituency all of that is is to get
down to the individual the family is the
smallest cluster of meaning and so you
get if nature wants to make sure that
you contribute to the group The Family
becomes the place where you can First
Express that but it's also the place
where you get to be uh you have a role
and so you're going to be able to have
autonomy so there's
um a lot of things if you've read
Stephen pinker's book drive uh talks a
lot about this Daniel pink I forget
which one of them wrote this forgive me
uh but there's a book called Stephen
pink there's a book called Drive you're
right it's definitely not Daniel pink
maybe the book is Drive anyway uh and in
it it talks about what really drives
people a huge driver other than meaning
and purpose is autonomy and so at the
family level there's a reason that
people say I'm the king of the castle
meaning of my own home like when I come
in my own home nobody else gets to tell
me what to do you know Etc et cetera and
so the husband and the wife come
together as this yin yang uh duel that
together is truly better than either of
them are individually if you take a
long-term stance you're going to shape
each other so you're literally making
each other better when it's functioning
well and then when you have kids now
you've got that I have done the thing I
have worked hard to become a worthy wife
or a worthy husband a worthy mom a
worthy father so worked hard gained a
set of skills and now I'm serving the
group not just myself so I'm doing
things that matter to me so I'm gonna
teach my son to be a man in a way that
feels good this is the way I believe
things ought to be and so in doing that
in that small atom now it's like you're
gonna get all that fulfillment that you
want now I get it this is probably
somewhat of a modern construct even if
you give me modern in the last 20 000
years right
but I think it's all an echo of things
that work at the tribal level things
that work at like the state level all of
it is you get these the individual has
to be strong under themselves
accomplished that's probably a dangerous
word to use but strong and accomplished
in the ways they will need to be to
serve the family need to be to serve
their local community and then it just
scales up from there so
we do have that drive to we're really
going to derail now but to we want to be
recognized for our contributions and so
my wife and I do that for each other
um we want to have something that lasts
Beyond us kids so anyway again I would
like to restate I don't have children so
it's not the path that I've chosen to
walk but when I look at from an
evolutionary standpoint I'm like that is
the safer path so anyway it goes back to
there's no solution there's only
trade-offs and I just want people to
understand okay whatever path I walk is
going to be a trade-off so what am I
trading off that's right and I think
that's a question that
that's why I said what I said on Twitter
about women
not having true choice I didn't quite
phrase it that way but that's what I
meant which is
a lot of people are being culturally
manipulated into making decisions that
are not in the long-term benefit or
interest or happiness they're just not
they're just not
um and they're being encouraged to see
uh the pursuit of meaningless things as
far superior to the things that will
actually give the meaning of fulfillment
on average doesn't mean there aren't
exceptions right but on average so that
I think is and those things you know
find a partner who loves you that you
love that you grow together with uh have
children if that's what you want to do
seek meaningful work and
um
you know to me I'm speaking just from
personal experience personal growth and
experience uh experiencing myself
develop is probably one of the highest
values that I hold for myself you know
guaranteed
um skill acquisition you know I always I
always talk to my guys about this it's
like you don't really want to learn how
to do a job necessarily you want to
acquire a set of skills and build the
set of skills that can be used to do
many different jobs and you package them
together this is why you know like I
know you you try to hand a stand up and
I did stand up for probably four or five
years I never got to the point you know
it takes about 10 years to become a
great stand-up I never got to the point
where I was great I was doing well I was
pretty good but what happened was I
found something that combined my skills
in a better way which is thinking and
talking and joking and you put that in a
package and then you've got something
that's much more interesting than just
for me at least as a stand-up comedian I
never found that as fulfilling as what I
do now
um
so meaningful work learn grow Etc and
then I think you know another layer to
add on top of this and this is actually
something that I I'm aware of thanks to
my wife men and women are incredibly
different incredibly different and so
you can't imagine how surprised there
was to find that same controversial I
was like what of all the things I was
like wait wait what I I don't know what
to say about that man I mean it's so
silly that we even have to have this
conversation but men and women are
incredibly different and one of the most
beneficial things to my wife and I's
relationship has been the fact that
we've read books about how exactly
different we are I mean John Gray who I
think lives somewhere around here who's
been writing about this for decades now
I don't know if I subscribed to every
tenant of his ideology or whatever but
his books work
and some of the things that I've learned
from that meant that we have a much more
fulfilled and happy relationship but
also we're much more fulfilled and happy
as individuals
um so that that unders you know it's
that know thyself thing I think uh and
part of the the problem with what I see
is we're deliberately brainwashing
people not to realize that they are to a
large extent what they are that part of
who you are is driven by your biology
and if you can understand how best to
manage that particularly in partnership
with someone of the opposite sex if you
are heterosexual you're gonna you're
gonna be like a rocket that's taking off
because you've got all of those things
you know your trigger points you know
the things that that don't work for you
you know what works for you just like
you know the I don't know if you're
familiar with John Gray's work but like
the idea of the cave for a man
uh basically it's the idea that every
now and again a man will pull back in a
relationship and will feel like you'll
go and like you know work try and repair
his motorcycle or play computer games or
read a book and you'll close the door to
the office and not be available and
women tend to find that very scary
because they're like whoa what the hell
is going on but the guy is just doing
his recharge so that he can come back
and be full of love again like that was
revolutionary because what women will do
if they don't know that is chase after
you into the cave which means you only
run away further and right it's just
Dynamic and John Gray wrote about this
in Men Are from Mars Women Are from
Venus like 40 years ago and now we've
got all these crazy people running
around saying oh there's no difference
between men and women I mean it's insane
the one that helped me the most it's
like one of those catchy phrases and I'm
like oh my God this is so true is uh
women need to feel loved to have sex yes
and men need to have sex to feel loved
that's right when I heard that I was
like oh my God like it was it was like
such an epiphany where oh now I get why
she acts the way that she does and now I
actually understand myself better
because I never really thought about it
but I was like yeah if we're not having
sex I feel disconnected yes whereas for
her if she feels disconnected she
doesn't want to have sex so now you can
get into this really weird dynamic where
it's like she wants you know all this
talk and like connection and I'm like
man like I'm not into sadness we're
having sex like what are we even talking
about here and here again we come back
to the problems with the society that we
live in
if you've got that issue going on which
every couple has had the solution
is difficult to articulate out loud
because it's very controversial
potentially I mean John Gray's solution
I don't want to misrepresent it but it's
kind of like sometimes you need to have
sex even though you're not entirely
just oh I'm waiting for you to say it oh
and it's like do you see what I mean I
do I am not advocating that anyone has
sex that for [__] I don't want to do
this but you know what I mean I know
exactly what you're saying so in order
for men and women to be healthy together
it requires us to be able to say some
things that we don't want to say in
public yeah
and that's a bad place to be
that we we feel hesitant to say them in
public right
um that's a bad place to be if we want
men and women to to be healthier and
that's another of the things that really
bugs me about the situation that we're
in is like the idea that men and women
are engaged in some sort of Battle of
the Sexes yeah is the craziest idea I've
ever [__] heard these two groups of
people who have spent the entirety of
human evolution
having to work together to survive and
to thrive they are they're what they're
against each other are you crazy are you
insane that and and the Very notion that
we spend almost no time talking about
how the sexist can and should live
together and coexist and grow together
and so on and we spend all our time
talking about who gets paid more and all
of this stuff I'm not saying those
things aren't necessarily important and
I'm against discrimination of any kind
obviously but the focus of our attention
to me is on that issue completely in the
wrong place yeah it's interesting all of
this stuff going back to that idea there
is a reason that these arguments endure
and the reason is that there is truth on
both sides so uh I read a lot about
history this is something that came to
me pretty recently like the last five or
six years and you read historical stuff
and you realize
men and women were working together to
survive it was very harsh but also like
people weren't really trying to
understand each other as deeply as we
might care about that now and so there
very much was like you went off to war
and you did your thing and you really
may do some raping and pillaging and
then you come back but it's like
he's still my husband and so all of the
stuff of we would never have survived
without helping each other and oh by the
way people really did Raven pillage it's
like both of those things are true and
history is messy and one thing I want to
talk about today but maybe not yet is
what I call the triangle of evil
um
humans are complicated like really
complicated and if we
I like the idea that there are certain
mind viruses that as as a society make
us on the long Arc of History Bend
towards Justice I love that like that's
amazing but any one lifetime can can
have its like horrible things happened
in that Society things that we would
never be okay with today I'm just like
really grueling but at the same time you
can go back to any time in history and
there would be love and you'd be even if
you were an arranged marriage that you
would find this mutual respect and you'd
raise kids that you love and you die for
each other I mean it's just like humans
are messy and complicated and beautiful
and wonderful and it's really
really interesting but you have to be
willing to get into the nuance and so
when I think about you know living in a
modern time I've been with my wife for
22 years and in no uncertain terms I am
a better person because of her I don't
know who I would be without her there
was a time before she stepped out front
so she was a housewife and just really
supporting me but I was starting to take
off as an entrepreneur starting to get
recognized how to show like all of that
and
I burst into tears one day and I'm not a
crier man so for people like that really
really know me they know that this is
like weird uh I burst into tears one day
privately just with my wife and I was
like you will never get credit for the
fact of who I've become because you have
influenced me and even even having that
conversation like I love talking about
there's a reason the cliche of behind
every powerful man is a powerful woman
because
women for eons not necessarily true now
with the pill and the sexual Revolution
and all that and they're in the
workforce but for Millennia they had to
work through men and so they got very
good at I want a thing and I'm gonna get
you to also want that thing are you
saying women are manipulating oh brother
I'm saying if we can use a word that is
less radioactive but a hundred percent
so uh in in the movie I'm just no I love
it it's just true it's true so going
back to this idea of being a predictive
engine right if the more you can predict
the outcome of your behaviors right the
closer you're getting to ground truth
and so from an evolutionary perspective
and look this has changed now and it's
awesome like I want women to work my
wife is is a boss [__] and uh is an
entrepreneur in her own right and is
unbelievable
but my wife will be the first to tell
you oh yeah for the first decade of our
marriage she wasn't expressing herself
in business she was expressing herself
through me in business and it worked and
she knew how to get what she wanted and
it was women from an evolutionary
perspective
they needed to be optimized to tend to
Young and so they have effectively
superpowers for raising kids doesn't
mean they need to raise kids you can
allocate those superpowers however you
want but that nature was just like hey I
need you to be very good at raising
children 15 of women have a fourth
photoreceptor uh that actually lets them
see colors that guys can't even see
which hypothesis goes would help them
see changes in color in their skin their
kids skin tone so that they'd be able to
read sickness mood whatever that makes a
lot of sense their breasts can produce
milk I mean just all kinds of things
there are hips for childbirth on and on
and on uh and so
understanding that
for Millennia women were I mean we are a
sexually dimorphic species not massively
we're not like gorillas where they're
you know eight times bigger than the
female but there is sexual dimorphism
men have stronger upper bodies Etc et
cetera so the workloads would tend to
get broken up in a certain way and so if
you're not going to be the half of the
species that's going to confront
something head-on like for a woman and
unfortunately I've seen uh these YouTube
videos where when you see a guy snap and
get uh throw a punch on a woman and you
recognize the difference in ability to
generate Force it's distressing
and you realize at the ends of the
spectrum because there's a ton of
overlap so of course there's a lot of
women that could beat up a lot of men
but as you get to the ends of the
distribution the strongest man is going
to be able to beat up every single woman
on the planet period Bar None end of
story uh and so
it would not be a good evolutionary
strategy for women to do the
confrontation head-on so they get far
more ingenious like they just have a
sophisticated set of tools that happen
to be psychological in nature that was a
lot of words to get around the word
manipulation but you get the idea so
um I was
Rock to tears to be like whoa you've
shaped me into a person that you will
never get credit for thankfully now with
everything that's happened I think she
does get a lot of credit she's able to
tell her own story and all that
um but it was really a breathtaking
moment for me to realize whoa like you
have shaped me I have shaped you we are
a partnership we bring equal value but
in different ways and the more we've
come to understand the different things
that we're good at and each of us are
good at different things but together we
really do bring equal weight but they're
not the same thing like we're not
competing on the same things uh you know
what's so interesting to me that you
tell that story because uh my wife and I
exactly the same I've been together 20
years hmm
um I know you guys have been together so
long yeah I've been together that long
and it was exactly the same story my
wife was always working uh from the
beginning but she was also working on me
from the beginning and pretty damn hard
actually
um and I actually I forgot to give you a
copy of my book I'll give you one
afterwards but I have read it but I want
to give you a signed copy and if you've
read it you know that the dedication and
it says to Elena with him not without
whom nothing would be possible and
everything would be pointless and that's
how I feel
um and more generally you know
women are incredible
to a man a woman is [__] amazing
because she can do things that you like
I remember the first time uh I saw my
mom resolve a conflict just with a smile
and a joke I was like wow
I couldn't believe it
because it was so different to the way
that young men in particular tend to do
things
and I was like whoa this is incredible
and so
that's one of the terrible things about
the standoffs that we create it's like
you can learn so much and grow so much
together and help each other so much
um that you know this division is
completely unnecessary should be the
other way around we should be looking
for ways to work together and
um you know that's why I've always found
uh personal development and relationship
growth together to be like essential
parts of life essential parts of life so
I he exactly what you're saying now as
for the recognition I mean
do do you you know I believe that partly
by talking about it my wife does get the
credit by dedicating my books to her in
that way she from people who read the
book she gets the credit and also now
I'd like to think after all the hard
work that she put in the investment is
starting to slowly pay off and as we
know from Jordan Peterson women make 80
of the purchasing decisions so all that
bacon that I'm going to be bringing home
you know she's going to be enjoying the
fruits of that and so are our children
and that's kind of how it should be at
least for us you know
um she she's very talented photographer
in her own right but it's not something
that she's ever made into a huge
business and I'm sure she'll carry on
doing it but right now she just wants to
be with her son and I I could not be
happier to be able to provide that in a
society in which that's actually become
quite difficult not many people can do
that for each other very true yeah it's
interesting and Society definitely has a
lot of influence on what people want or
think they're supposed to want so I
lived a really interesting trajectory
with my wife so started out she was a
good Greek girl raised to be a housewife
her dad literally said all right fine
you want to go study film it doesn't
matter you're just going to end up
married and with kids and he didn't mean
in a horrible way I mean that's just how
he came up and so
for her she was very much raised to be a
wife and a mother
but she had dreams and but for the first
decade of our relationship she wasn't
pursuing it she ended up writing a book
about this and it was actually really
interesting to see the beginning of our
marriage from her perspective of like oh
I've kind of been relegated to this
housewife role I don't know like I know
I want to be a mom because in the
beginning she did she wanted four kids
and uh you know I know I want to be a
mom but I don't know that I want to be a
housewife and so but I do want to
support my husband and so like that was
the vibe and then I needed her help at
work when we started this new company
and she was like to support my husband I
will help no interest in being an
entrepreneur just I want to be a good
wife I'm going to support my husband and
then supporting me was like okay the
job's getting kind of big okay now you
I'm gonna need you to hire some
employees now you're running a division
with 40 people under you and you're
responsible for 85 million dollars in
revenue and you've got like a 10 000
square foot warehouse and like all this
stuff and it was just like whoa how did
I turn around and and she's now an
entrepreneur and like in the thick of it
for years and then realizes actually I
don't want kids I'm getting so much
fulfillment out of this and growing and
all of that that I want to do this thing
and I had to mourn the loss of my
housewife and it's something that we've
talked really openly about and she you
know is this is all playing out
becoming very different dynamic between
us is changing and
I was like
I want you to become whoever you want to
become and my value system mandates that
I help you thrive in whatever way you
want to thrive but you have to give me
the space to mourn that I used to have
somebody that was supporting me cooking
all my meals laying out my clothes
taking care of the house you know we
were preparing to have kids all that and
and now that's going away and
I'm cool with that because I want you to
be who you want to be but
let's be realistic about this is a major
change and so this is going to take some
reorientation and so we talk through it
and process through it and I actually
was very fine not having kids for the
longest time I was the one dragging our
feet she wanted to have kids right away
and I was like yo let's slow roll this
here uh so I was very fine with that but
that change in Dynamic wasn't something
that was easy but to your earliest point
on this it's we're not battling like
we're trying to find this thing where
we're sharing a life together and that's
how we've always looked at it is okay
for us divorce isn't an option we never
say the d word we don't even joke about
it so I'm never going to be like oh if
you don't do that you're gonna find
yourself out on the street hahaha like
nope we don't play that game at all yeah
we don't either and
um this is the other thing that's
difficult to say but
if you want to preserve a relationship
that's the sort of attitude that we will
take in a lot of cases
in a lot of cases and there are people
who get married and never never say a
crossword to each other but they're not
the majority
um and they're obviously people who are
abusive and and all of that but for the
vast majority of people
having a relationship that you're not
prepared to give up on
either of you it has to be both of you
it has to be both of you that are not
prepared to give up on uh is going to
make it much more likely that you don't
give up on it
absolute facts and so
again in a culture where we treat each
other much more as objects than we I
think ever have done before whereas you
know oh
blonde brunette you know get whatever
you want on an app
that is much less likely I think and
also we are all
um
we're all so much more interested in
ourselves as individuals
um that that again becomes more
difficult so
um that thing that you're talking about
that's the way
that's the way that it's certainly the
way that I've experienced it
um the way to fulfillment in a
relationship the way to being together
to being able to have different visions
of your future and reconcile them over
time and accept that you're not both
exactly the way that the other person
would like that's a that's a process man
that's a process that you have to really
really work on
and in order to do that when you've got
all these other great options supposedly
um you know he takes that commitment he
takes that commitment I think it takes
saying we're not talking about divorce
because there's I don't know about you
there have been plenty of situations in
which in our relationship we could have
gone down that towards that path at
least you know
um and to me
you know all the stuff that we do and
whatever it's inevitable that your
relationship with your spouse is going
to be the most important thing uh it
just is no doubt just is no doubt yeah
man relationships this is It's hard to
watch what's happening in the culture
now where they're just people having sex
a lot less and you get the
um
God I always forget how the stat goes
but it's like a small number of men are
getting all the action getting all the
action yeah nice nice and easy way to
say it and then hypergamy which for
people that haven't heard that word
before the female tendency to date
across and up in the status hierarchy as
women make more money it becomes a more
narrow pool and if they're not able to
broaden their Horizons economically then
they find themselves without a mate or
they're competing for that really really
small pool of guys that then aren't uh
they're not going to commit because
they've got so many women coming to them
for sex and I hear this anecdotally I
mean I I have friends who are like
incredible women
incredible there oh
they are successful they are [__]
brilliant talented and they they find
themselves in relationships with guys
where you know their expectation of what
relationship is supposed to be which is
commitment and so on because the the guy
that they're with has to be even
in many situations even more amazing
even more amazing you don't need to you
don't need to commit it doesn't need to
commit and and there's also another
Factor here which is
you know again this is difficult to say
but mate values different for men and
women particularly over time yeah
and as a woman as you get older a guy in
his 50s who's a billionaire and
successful and famous and whatever he
doesn't need to be dating a woman his
age
right but a woman in her 50s is not
likely to be dating a hot 25 year old
guy it's just not how that works so I
feel really so much empathy and sympathy
and a lot of concern actually for women
who are in that situation because they
deserve to to be fulfilled and to have
those relationships and to have the kids
that they want to have but we've we've
got a society where that that's more
difficult you know it's it's really not
a healthy situation in my opinion and
also you talk about
you know
um people having less sex and it's true
young people are having less sex than
others and you do have the the issue at
the top of the sort of mail where
they're having a lot but also there are
a lot of women now who are having a lot
of sex not because they actually want to
but because they think that this is the
one that's going to take them to the
relationship that they want you see what
I mean and women are now quite often
finding themselves having sex in a very
masculine male way where it's like
you're supposed to not feel Detachment
and not feel attachment and all of that
and the truth is that's not really how
it works for the vast majority of women
there are some exceptions of course but
having sex in the male way of women just
kind of makes them miserable you know
and I think that's tragic
I think we should all acknowledge that
that's tragic to that a lot of women are
doing things that aren't making them
happy but again for some reason saying
it makes you a bad person I think that
so if I were gonna steal man why that
makes you a bad person here's what I
think is happening so
there is people need to know that I'm a
worthy person I'm worthy of love I'm
worthy of respect no matter what path I
choose and so that's why if I were going
to insert like a new way to talk about
this it's like let's say that I'm a life
counselor and I do this in business a
lot I actually I do this in life uh
stuff we have something called impact
Theory University people come and ask me
questions and I'm like here's how I
think through that problem if somebody
came to me with that the first thing I
always say is okay what's your goal you
tell me the goal and then I'm going to
try to help you get there
and if you tell me that okay my goal is
to have a lot of sex but I don't want to
catch feels okay we can do that but we
have to understand there's no Solutions
only trade-offs so if you run that here
are going to be the potential risk given
what evolution has primed you for which
is going to be connection that uh sex is
a high investment thing because from an
evolutionary standpoint you getting
pregnant was a big deal for guys not so
much amazing you know dine and dash and
they're good and maybe they have a kid
maybe they don't but for you you're
going to carry that kid it's a huge
expense you have to raise them ah so
that is a it puts you in a super
vulnerable position all that so there's
a lot of Machinery in your brain that's
going to be different than the partner
that you're seeking who's really wired
for that game that you're playing so we
can do it cool but like we need to
understand what what are going to be the
trade-offs here odds of you catching
feels go up a lot odds of you finding
fulfillment and doing that go down a lot
you're going to be pulling against sort
of The evolutionary trajectory
which again I'm perfectly open to
navigating that path but I just want
people to start this this isn't a moral
thing you're not a worse person but if
you're playing a what all when I say a
higher risk game what I mean is that
Evolution has given you a playbook for
fulfillment there's not only one path so
there are different ways to get there
but like the thing that I think protects
Lisa and I somewhat is we understand by
not having kids that we're we're taking
the more high risk path to fulfillment
because we're doing it through a company
that's part of it so what happens to my
fulfillment if the the public that is
consuming the product that I make is
like this sucks do I get to be fulfilled
anymore or is it now well you didn't get
the outcome that you wanted and so that
invalidates my whole life so we've had
to build like
thought matrices to deal with that right
so the way that we combat that is don't
value yourself for the end result value
yourself for the sincere Pursuit so did
you sincerely try to get a growth
mindset out at scale through ideas and
entertainment yes but it just it didn't
work I was never able to quite build the
skill set all right man you went for
something you really played to win and
et cetera et cetera so all right you're
you're going down this this high risk
path not not risk you know necessarily
cosmically just fulfillment is my North
Star I laid that out earlier what I
think everybody should be optimizing for
and so if we can strip some of the
Judgment away from that if we can give
people a growth mindset so they know oh
I didn't get what I wanted okay I can
try something different and hopefully
get something more akin to what I want
in another path so you're not giving up
your agency you know what you want you
established your goal first
you run an experiment this this is
literally the physics of progress you
know what your goal is you see what the
obstacle is between where you're at and
your goal you run the experiment did you
actually get closer to your goal yes no
if no try again better the next time you
know what I mean you just repeat the
cycle but if you feel like whoa I didn't
get what I wanted that doesn't feel good
I feel judged by you now I'm just going
to go on the attack so you don't tell me
the thing that I'm feeling
and that's where it's like well now you
can't even navigate well on the higher
risk path that you've chosen to get the
Fulfillment that you ultimately want to
feel which is where we come back to the
fact that most people are not operating
at a level of emotional Detachment that
you are and so uh and also if you speak
to women privately a lot of them will
say that the the falling into the Trap
that I described is not a deliberate
thing they're not going out to go and
have lots of sex without catching the
fields
if they're actually honest with
themselves not all of them but many of
them if they can get past the emotion
what their what they actually want is to
to date and find a partner to be with
for the for you know I was going to say
the rest of life because that's kind of
my value but you know what I mean to
settle down with to have children with
whatever if the if that's what they want
um but they're not able to do that
because they feel that there's a
pressure because all the other girls are
available to the guy that they're
currently with to have sex with on the
second day however anecdotally as I
observe people around me the women who
don't don't let that happen straight
away tend to end up much more likely
securing the partner yeah that seems to
be a strategy that works better
um but you're right I mean I I'm
actually loving this conversation so
much partly because
you're showing people a way of operating
in the world that is so much more
powerful than the way that the vast
majority of people operate probably to
some extent me included I don't have the
level of emotional Detachment that you
do uh in terms of making these decisions
so it's I'm learning it's interesting
you uh you have a way though of thinking
that is very analytical you're able to
articulate very difficult points
um so I suppose in the end this is all
trade-off because I would kill to be
able to do what you do uh which now
brings us to the triangle of evil
because I I want your thoughts on this
because well I need your help on this
because this is something that I um
let's talk about evil yeah I think of
evil I think of you come on of course
yeah uh okay so the triangle of evil is
uh Mao Stalin Hitler and I think that
they
I've read a lot about them and they feel
to me reflective of something that's
just real in the human psyche
um and I have taken away from reading
about them so oddly enough Hitler was
like sort of the the slow boy in all of
this did not kill nearly as many people
as Stalin and Mao like which growing up
I never heard about I had no idea that
those were uh dark figures in the world
which is already startling
but reading about them
uh getting back to this idea of their so
in fact we haven't talked about this but
we've sort of danced around it the way I
see the world is it is uh um
a scale so you have right and left just
to keep it easy but there's a pathology
on both sides so if you go too far in
either direction you're going to have a
problem it doesn't matter so Mao and
Stalin are what the left look like when
they become pathological and Hitler is
what the right looks like when it
becomes pathological
um in even in in and of itself I that's
disputable but we can get in hit me with
it
well people don't like to hear this
argument but there's a reason that
Hitler's party was called the national
socialists interesting
what does the right then look like if it
goes pathological well this is the
debate I mean
so not only Nazism but also fascism I
mean the term fascism comes from the
word fascia which is a bundle in Rome
that was woven it's it's a collectivist
mindset but the fascist and and the
national socialists on a large number of
things were
uh left wing in in the way that we
conceive of being left-wing now
economically particularly
um we have an interview on our Channel
with uh one of my favorite guests ever
he's a brilliant guy called Stephen
Hicks a Canadian professor of his
philosopher and historian of philosophy
and and if you kind of want to delve
into that I'd recommend people go and
check that out because I won't do it
justice here uh however I we can also
conceptualize it rather than going as a
scale as a circle which is or like a
horseshoe or something where the two
extremes end up coming quite close
together because they end up operating
in similar ways
um so it's a just a side point really
for our discussion no it's actually very
interesting so uh reading about them
seeing that there's this horseshoe
shaped where the the
they're trying to control everything
because and I'll even give them I'll
I'll give them the benefit of the doubt
and I will say they're not evil they
really believed that they had the right
answer now it's tough to look real close
and not feel like they weren't just
[__] evil but that's too easy it's an
easy way to dismiss them let's say for a
second that they really believed in
their heart that they were going to do
good things for a lot of people and but
just real quick I just have to kill a
few of you in order to get everybody in
line because I'm trying to distribute
things fairly or I'm trying to in the
case yeah the case of Nazi Germany like
hey we got a bum rap you know after
World War One like we gotta rise out of
this somehow and uh but I'm gonna have
to kill a few of you and I am gonna have
to make sure that you don't say anything
bad against me and so to distribute
everything evenly
we're gonna have to kill the kulaks and
um but at the end of this everything's
gonna be okay so what is it about human
nature that allows people to think that
to usher in the Utopia it's okay to
break a few eggs to make the omelette
I don't know it's the honest answer I
think we talked a little bit about
collectivism before and I think that's a
big part of the answer to your question
collectivism is an ideology that
uh
justifies the sacrifice of some for the
benefit of the greater good so the
pathology requires the abandonment of
the individual's safe sacredness
certainly in the cases that you're
talking about that was absolutely the
case these are not people who believed
in the rights of the individual these
are people who believed that for the
greater good some people must be
sacrificed and
who knows I mean
one of the difficult parts of this
conversation is
can you run a country like Russia
on a western liberal mindset
this is a big debate among
geopoliticians because the people just
won't take to it not so much about the
people it's it's a pretty [__] hard
country to survive and it's cold it's
remote it's disparate it's poorly
developed uh can you really uh make that
country exist without authoritarianism
it's exactly it's a legitimate question
actually why would it need
authoritarianism I thought you were
going to say you would need collectivism
well it's both so you can't have one
without the other so you need a
totalitarian leader to have a collective
estate is potentially a way of looking
at decisions I'm not committing to that
statement but if you look at the history
of Russia I mean Russia's never had
democracy ever there's never been a
single proper Democratic position of
power in Russia ever ever
um it it's it's not the case uh you know
there are different ways of conceiving
of a lot of geopolitical thinkers talk
about uh the Civil different types of
civilizations and British and American
Civil civilizations like um this is
actually something I have a couple of
pieces on my sub stack about this uh
breaking down the philosophy of a guy
called Alexander Dugan who's called they
call him Putin's brain now
how influential he is in the Kremlin we
don't know exactly but
I break down some of the the basic
arguments and the argument is that uh
countries like Britain and America the
civilizations of the sea they're trading
nations their commercial Nations they
use the power of their Navy historically
speaking like the British Empire and
today the United States to influence and
and interact with other countries
whereas and this goes back historically
Carthage
was a civilization of the sea this is a
trading nation and they stood in
opposition to the Roman Empire which is
a civilization of the land to the
Chinese and the Russian Empires today
which are civilizations of the land and
one of the arguments is that
civilizations of the land are
necessarily collectivists unnecessarily
authoritarian
because the way that they have to
operate in the world is very very
different to the way that trading
nations operate because the values of
liberalism for example are much more
suited to a naval-based trading Nation
than it is to a collect a land-based
nation like a Russia or China so
to some extent you know am I claiming
that if it's kind of like that argument
about can you bomb democracy into
Afghanistan Well turns out you can't
right and that's because they have their
own culture and their own values that
don't really then that it's not having
voting booths is not enough for
democracy right it requires certain
other cultural assumptions that don't
exist in other parts of the world
um so yeah collectivism seems to be a
particular thing that goes hand in hand
with authoritarism and it makes sense
because if you have a society in which
uh the majority is going to kill a
minority or tell them what to do or
restrict their rights and somehow that
will require Force inevitably
yeah that's the part that always feels
like it's missing from the dialogue of
people that want to uh you know
redistribute wealth or whatever is at
some point
when you start taking things from one
person to give to somebody else
you're going to have to do that by force
like it won't
it won't just happen naturally and so
you really stop me in my tracks when you
said that a collectivist nation requires
an authoritarian leader I had never
thought about that before
um
that's really interesting because I had
always thought about it as just
communism requires an authoritarian
leader but I didn't step it back to the
collectivist society that ends up giving
birth to Communism also just by its
nature that's where it's headed uh
that's really interesting I don't know
how I feel about that I don't I don't
actually know if it's true I'm just
throwing it out there as an idea for us
to discuss it it's distressingly true
yeah I just don't like the way it makes
me feel
so that okay so the reason that I call
this a triangle of evil is because
reading about it was really eye-opening
so I grew up in Tacoma Washington not
particularly educated on this kind of
stuff then went straight into business
as a way to have enough resources to
tell my stories and so maybe when a lot
of other people were waking up to what
the world is like I was not
um and so I discovered this when I
started reading about history and when
you read about history you start to see
the patterns that people are talking
about and you're like whoa like this
stuff really does repeat like this this
becomes really predictable
which is why I it feels like talking
about culture is important because
whatever happens to the culture is
really going to have profound impacts on
the individual my bias again and how
they either can Thrive or not Thrive and
so reading about for instance how Mao
took over China and
what the human tragedy is when you
really believe that it's okay to kill as
many people as you need to in order to
have the power to make the world go the
way that you want it to go and I can't
help but keep defaulting back to
[Music]
um
if you know what your goal is
and you know the experiment that you're
going to run and you can look at the
outcome of this it's like hey this is
predictable that if if you try to do
communism like you because everyone
keeps going well communism hasn't really
been tried or socialism hasn't really
been tried it's like but you can run it
even as a thought experiment so even if
I grant you okay these were all
imperfect the thought experiment should
lead you to realize it can't be done
perfectly
like it's not possible because you're
asking every single person to willingly
give things up on an equal basis and
when you interface with the world in any
capacity you very quickly realize it's
just impossible to get everybody to
think the same and so my read on this is
that Evolution guaranteed that people
don't think the same that it wants that
Dynamic tension that we were talking
about before
what do you like as somebody that grew
up in the USSR what do you say to people
that are like oh it's never really been
tried and we just need to get it right
you know in some ways I almost don't
think there's any point in saying
anything because I don't think that
coming from the same place that you come
from when you're talking about these
things you come at it from the point of
view of what is my goal how am I going
to get there I don't think the people
who advocate for you know fairly extreme
forms of Socialism or communism uh or
social democracy as they call it but
often it's really a disguise for for
their views uh I don't think they're
coming at it from the point of view of a
goal I think they're coming at it from a
point of view of dissatisfaction with
the status quo
and people who start revolutions
are operating almost always on that
basis it's not about you know
you know I was driving past the shop and
I saw a better table I'll go and buy
that table it's like this table is so
bad let's throw it out and then we'll
find something right
um I think that tends to be how people
think about it and you know the thing I
always say to people in the west you
talk about the inevitability of it all
um
as you know I talk about this in the
book
my grandmother
she's not my biological grandmother but
she she was my grandfather's second wife
and I always called her my grandmother
she was born in a gulag she was there
because her parents who weren't married
or didn't know each other at the time
had been sent there both losing their
other spouses in the process and they
met there
and she was born in in this camp
and what happened once you were released
from the camps was you were not allowed
to live within a very long distance of
the major cities in the U.S society you
essentially became like a third class
Citizen and what happened was most of
the former prisoners of these camps
ended up settling in areas and small
towns nearby
where they lived together with the local
small minorities a local native
population various sort of tribes that
had been living there for for centuries
and
the former guards from the very same
camps
that these prisoners had been in
1953 when Joseph Stalin died
um my grand my grandmother and her
family they were living in a tiny flat
tiny apartment uh across
The Landing there was another apartment
which was a family where the man was one
of the guards in one of the camps Jesus
living across like this and my
grandmother tells the story how that
guy's mother if the kids misbehaved she
would say to them you know when your
parents get sent back to the camp Jesus
you're gonna get kicked out and we're
gonna get your apartment as well
wow now 1953 Joseph Stalin dies
and
my grandmother told me that there was a
Spate of suicides
among these former Gods wow because what
they were doing was finally revealed for
what it was these people truly believed
they truly believed that they they were
beating these people and torturing these
people and killing these people for the
greater good because that's what they
were told
and so what I say to people in the west
always is do not be a useful idiot do
not violate your own moral standards and
your own moral rules for the sake of the
greater good there is no greater good
than your own moral standards
there is no greater good than that
do you know in fact you do because
you've read the book but
most people have no idea how the USSR
got a nuclear bomb
it was given to them
by
Soviet sympathizers in the West
and that is why Joseph Stalin a man who
killed millions of his own people ended
up having a nuclear weapon and was able
therefore to threaten and challenge the
west and that's how you end up with a
cold war because people in the west some
of them were so enamored with their own
vision of Utopia that they would give
the most destructive weapon in the
history of the world to one of the most
evil men in the 20th century because
they believed in this collectivist
vision and they were useful idiots
do not be useful idea do not violate
your own moral code for anyone for
anything that's what I say to people in
the West
how do you come up with a moral code
well you're going all Jordan Peterson on
me because when he had me on his podcast
we had a three-hour conversation about
God I listened to it yeah yeah and it
was difficult because
the flip and an obvious answer is it's
what I learned from my parents it's what
I learned from the books I read is from
I learned from the society in which I
lived from the movies I watched and what
I the residual
um
the residual thing that I got out of
that
um but you know Jordan Peterson probably
tell you it's religion you know other
people will tell you something else I
don't have that answer I wish I did do
you think we live in a time where you
have to Cobble one together
I've had to couple one together yeah
yeah have you yes right so
that's kind of worry worrying in in
something I think it's part of why we're
out where we're at that's that's what I
think that's what we're talking about
exactly
but I also think a moral code it's not
always true because a moral code will
sometimes require you to jump in front
of a tank
but generally speaking a moral code is a
good long-term strategy because it is a
way of relating to other people and to
reality that is more effective than
others this is one of the things that I
find so funny when people say to me oh
Constantine you're so brave for speaking
out about this I actually believe that
you believe that yeah
it's one of the reasons I want to have
you on
okay well what I say to those people are
you [__] mental
what are you talking about
how is it Brave my ancestor staff to
death and the gulags
what you think me expressing my opinion
in public is Brave
yeah why that's Insanity there's
something Brave about it it's my duty to
say what I think if I think that
something is wrong isn't it yes
so why is that brave uh just because
something is right doesn't mean that
it's not doesn't demand courage okay how
does it demand courage
oh that's interesting this doesn't feel
like you could possibly be asking me
that question I love it we are equally
thinking the other person is absolutely
out of their minds okay so uh here's how
I look at your life you are you are
whippet smart man and you are really
articulate and you could make a real
living even in the Soviet Union if you
just like turned a part of your brain
off that was like I'm either never gonna
talk about these things or I'm only
going to talk about them when I'm at
home and I will use the system to my
advantage I will work my way up which
you'd be very easily be able to do uh
because you can out think people so I
have a feeling if you had just a little
evil in you you could get people to
think things were their ideas that were
clearly yours uh you would manipulate
the [__] out of them you would rise to a
position of power and so you could do
all of that and now it would require you
to set aside your moral compass or not
have one or adopt one out of convenience
minions right which I I unfortunately
think humans are all too capable of
doing so the fact that you don't do any
of that the fact that you
um
are in a western country in a moment
where people really get a certain
religious
emotional
um righteousness out of tearing down
wrong think and the wrong people and it
makes them feel like they have done
something good
and it's a a sugar version of moral
virtue but it's still like something it
gives them a rush and so
now look you're not dumb so you've made
you've made a good living out of doing
that and I think your channel is only
going to get bigger and bigger and
bigger but
um
because I'll say I'll say in a single
sentence why to me it's you seem Brave
uh you're a contrarian you don't mind
the conflict you actually posted a
hilarious photo of you maybe it was
video okay remember on Twitter it was
you with a machine gun and you said uh
uh it's like I'm ready to open Twitter
yeah exactly exactly and I was like
that's [__] hilarious and then yeah
I'm not gonna do that because I hate
that and my audience this may not seem
as weird to you because it's the only
time we sat down across from each other
my audience is going to find this
episode very weird oh are they I've
never done an episode like this ever
have you not never oh wow so but you
should have told me I would have gone
easy on them no this is great I love it
like I I will I would have lit a candle
you know did a little stroking you know
very kind no no no need but it's um so
anyway I when I see people that are just
completely unafraid to roll up to
Twitter with the machine gun in hand I'm
like all right you say what you believe
you're standing for something I think
but what should I be afraid of this is
what I don't understand
what is it that I'm supposed to be
afraid of a bunch of people I don't know
and don't respect on a social media
platform where they don't even show you
their face or name saying things about
me no you should fear what's happening
to Jordan Peterson he said he's in the
middle of 10 lawsuits as somebody that's
been in the middle of lawsuits let me
tell you what a toll they take on you
and maybe I'm too stupid and not brave
maybe that's yeah I don't think you're
stupid but you might be naive to
something that is entirely possible and
as you crack it'll be interesting to see
what happens to you when you crack a
million Subs on YouTube it starts to get
different real fast yeah and what's
happening with Jordan where he's with
the whole bill c-16 which I can think of
no hotter like that's the nuclear core
and he came to prominence by latching on
to the nuclear core and he has said in
his very Jordan Peterson way that
um I if you arrest me I will uh if you
give me a final refuse to pay it if you
put me in jail I will go on a hunger
strike and I actually think he means
that I think he's so [__] stubborn
that he actually will and in the gulag
archipelago there's a great section from
Soldier knitson where he says it's
really interesting people come in you
get tortured Everybody Breaks actually
that's not true not everybody breaks and
the people that are so ideologically
like convicted they they will let you
kill them and they're all women and I
was like that is [__] hilarious going
back to what you were saying about men
and women being different and I just
thought that's my wife and that's Jordan
Peterson which he has said I have a more
feminine temperament like he just will
get something in his head and it
apparently no matter the amount of pain
that rains down on that man he just
keeps going and that doesn't look fun to
me his life does not look fun to me
but I believe
you know Jordan isn't perfect he's a man
clearly and by the way I think he's
amazing but holy [__] uh does he
sometimes say things I'm like Jordan are
you trying to make your life suck like
that's a really dumb way to say that
but if we come back to the very
beginning of our conversation which is
about meaning and fulfillment
I couldn't be fulfilled using my
whatever you're very kind about my
intelligence and everything else using
that for things like that I
fundamentally
but I think are wrong right so that
reads is brave P.S no what that reads as
is not having a choice it doesn't read
as Brave to you I get that I hear you
but I don't have a choice bravery is
when you're like well I could do this I
could do that I'll do this I don't
really feel like I have a choice I feel
like I I you know it's weird that I I
have a background that's quite unusual
that is perfectly fitted to the cultural
moment of at the moment which is like I
was born in the Soviet Union I speak
Russian and English I understand both
cultures I can articulate myself pretty
well I grew up in Britain so I fit in
that culture I can see it as an outsider
and likewise in America
um
you know I can make things funny if I
need to I can be serious if I need to
like it's a it's a skill set and a
background that not many people have
so what choice do I have would you be a
dissident in Russia yes yeah see [__] do
you know uh my whole family with
dissidents in Russia so like it's it's
not it's not a new thing that is very
interesting that's actually one of the
things that I wrote a piece on my sub
stack when my son was born
um
and I talked about a lot of this
you know
we come from generations of people who
who were killed for their beliefs um
I'm not going to dishonor them
uh I'll say it again from where I'm
sitting that's Brave
I want to think that I would be as tough
I don't know if I'd be a dissident in
Russia that's just the honest answer and
it doesn't make me feel good about
myself but in the story I will tell
myself tonight is going to be that I
would work in the underground
but I wouldn't be I think her name is
Nadia from [__] Riot no [__] way and
I I have met her and had her to the
house and I was just like what the [__]
were you doing like that was my impulse
it was just like you know they kill
people for doing that
so yeah I'm I I am terrified that I
could ever become the useful idiot
I am terrified that I will get tested by
life and come out of coward
uh so I do I mean the whole reason that
I have changed the tenor of my show over
the last three years is to not feel like
a coward
uh
but I don't know that I'd be a dissident
in Russia
I don't know that I would you know what
I think the truth is that nobody does
you don't know who you are until you're
in that moment I I might turn out to be
a little [__] if I if I if I go back to
Russia which I don't for precisely the
reasons that we've discussed
um I don't think you do know that I
don't think anyone does
um but my point is and and this is it's
not a self-obsessed conversation I'm
just I don't understand why people keep
saying this to me
the the things that I'm saying are
reasonable things
I do my best to articulate them in a way
that people can hear sometimes I fail of
course and sometimes just like Jordan
Peterson I'm human right so I say things
that piss people off and
I'm surrounded by people who give me
advice on how to say them better for
which I'm grateful and one of the things
that really I find very positive
particularly after the Oxford speech
that I did I get very famous people
from the left
reaching out to me now
and going can we talk how about this can
we discuss this giving me advice too and
going look if you want to you know we
can see that in your speech you were
trying to reach the other side well if
you do here's a way that you might want
to phrase this right I see that as
reassurance I see that as as a sign of
that I'm doing the right thing
but I don't really understand what what
this is that I'm supposed to fear you
know okay I don't know why Jordan is in
10 lawsuits but do what do do I think
that I need to be probably not you know
um I haven't made a massive living out
of trigonometry it's just something that
pays the bills at the moment it will get
to a point where you know it's it's
massive I look forward to that moment I
see already in the last few months what
happens as you grow the words you say
matter more people take them more
literally more seriously and you have to
but that's it's an exciting challenge
isn't it
and you know I remember it's a moment
that stuck with me when I was a kid um I
went to a boarding school uh and so we
rarely encountered the parents of the
other kids well one time I was watching
a rugby game uh that my friend was
playing in and his dad was on the
sideline and we were talking about a pre
a game uh an international rug began
that had happened a few days ago and
somebody said to him well you know there
was this player he took the final kick
imagine that pressure
wow that's got to be hard and this Dad
of my friend he said it's not that
that's not how you think about it the
way you think about it is imagine how
many people would love to be in the
position
to have that sort of impact
and that always stayed with me you know
what a privilege it is you know I've
just spent however long you know before
we sat down and people think I'm sucking
up to you but we sat down we were
talking about uh
various stuff and one of them was uh my
business trigonometry you know and I
could see within seconds that you've got
like one of the most incredible mindsets
about that stuff that I've ever
encountered and I get to sit here and
speak with you for hours
where's The Bravery come on man
tens of thousands of your countrymen
many of them are still alive stormed the
beaches of Normandy
come on come on more people need to say
what they think and it's not that scary
it's not that hard and by the way if
more people did it it would be a lot
less scary for everybody
and that's why you know I came here from
Bill Marshall Bill Mars doing exactly
what he should be he's using his voice
to say enough
enough of this craziness and guess what
nothing happens especially if you're a
multi-millionaire Hollywood celebrity
nothing happens and guess what his
audience is now filled with people who
were clapping points that I was making
right that's what happens when people
speak up so let's the reason I resist so
much this label of Brave is not some
personal thing I just think
I'm not saying it's true in your case
I'm not saying it's true in other
people's cases but a lot of people want
to push that brave room to me so they
don't have to do anything so they can
say well I'm not as Brave I'm gonna sit
here and say nothing well it doesn't
take any courage really it just takes
principles
dude this has been so fun where can
people follow you I'm uh at Constantine
kitchen everywhere the YouTube channel
is trigonometry and the book is and
immigrants love letter to the West
everybody if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care peace
click here now to learn why this
generation of men is struggling and
feeling lost I honestly think that you
could look at a man on the street now
point at him and have a 50 chance that
he hasn't had sex in the last year
that's insane what we want is for women
to have partners that they are
fundamentally attracted